Summary form only given. Hot topics in new technology developments and their applications in future telecommunication systems are discussed. Recently new technology development in telecommunication systems have been accelerated together with the technology development of the related basic technologies. Major three basic core technologies are discussed in terms of the core network speed (Gbps), HDD recording density and the server processing speed(TFLOPS). In this regard the bio industry can be additional new market. Electronic-nation strategy to build the most advanced IT nation is discussed from the view point of application area (new scheme) and infrastructure development. Ubiquitous-net is discussed by using ubiquitous nation strategy from the view point of next generation ICT society that can be realized in the near future. Impact on economy, impact on local areas and impact on livelihood are discussed. Next and new generation networks are discussed from the view point of providing open service platform based on manageable IP network. From the environmental view point CO2 emissions reduction is estimated based on ICT in Japan. New network technology roadmap is discussed for internet/cellular system, broadband ubiquitous network and semantic network. Directions to network evolution is examined based on the assumption that new communication networks would be capable of understanding situation and control itself autonomously according to changes in situation in order to guarantee quality of communication. Real-time field management by SDP is discussed based on visualization of all related operations and optimizations of the business by widely supporting service collaboration and information acquisition/sharing. Three usage patterns of context information are discussed from the view point of context-aware transport control, context-aware service control, and provision of context-information to application. Situation-aware monitoring is discussed based on the concept- of monitoring center with appropriately networked information from visual and audio equipment. Recipient-aware service optimization is discussed as a practical application of accelerated progress in the telecommunication technology.
