Retrofitting of rural housing is one of the most important issues to improve the quality of villagers' life and prevent probable damages during a natural disaster. Therefore, the retrofitting of rural housing has become one of the focal points of concern in the agenda of Housing Foundation of Islamic Revolution and other responsible institutions and agencies .Experts believe that budgets would be better spent for implementing fundamental changes in rural housing rather than dealing with the mental and physical damages incurred by natural disasters. As a result, many actions with the objective of establishing the culture of strong construction and also retrofitting existing homes have been taken. Educating the rural population is the most important one. Teaching how to make use of materials, suitable and durable construction, are some of the most important cases that have been carried out. But the main issue is how this training can be done with more depth and how to make its effects more durable .According to the hypothesis being considered, if instead of the general populace, families are taught (family-led training), the education would be more durable and stable. To test this hypothesis, four villages were selected randomly and two groups were evaluated in each. The first group included those who participated individually in the training and the second group was dedicated to those who participated as a family. The research method employed in this survey was descriptive-analytical, also known as the logical argumentation in novel research methods, since these methods are based on the ability of arguments and available data to prepare the required answers for investigational questions.  The technique used for collecting data is field survey, in which the quantitative data is chosen from the archetypes. The general topic information and theoretical literature is based on studies by professional systems, especially the Housing Foundation of the Islamic Republic of Iran, which is collected by the library method. Processing data is accomplished by graphs and illative methods. Study results indicate that although family-led training does not show much success in the beginning, but after the end of the experimentation period and the passing of time, greater success was achieved .Family-led training, due to family interaction and the training system, strengthens the education and is more harmonious with rural life which is based on families. The aforementioned model can be suitable for rural education .This method of teaching causes the will for cooperation and the sense of self-help within the family and outside in the rural community. Although these cases can be seen in individual education, studies show that continuous education, which is a characteristic of successful teaching, is more effective in family-led education.
