Humble look to the profession of architecture has reduced the position and identity of Iranian architecture in recent years. Due to the blind and extensive imitation of the Western culture over the design in architecture, we are facing buildings with non-Iranian identities that have hurt urban and rural landscapes. The buildings that create no feeling of belonging due to the imitation of Western style architecture.
The main point of this research is the use of site layers in designing process and combining them with different understandings of completely Iranian identity. This is the story of how the final design is affected by each layer and how the proposed model connects the past, the present and the future. In this way, by identifying the  subjective - objective layers in the environment such as ecology and geography, we are looking for a plan to meet all the present parameters and give a proper identity simultaneously. The purpose is how to use quantitative - qualitative models in parametric design process under Meta system. Ecological-orientation has been selected as Meta system in this project. This means that all conscious and unconscious processes are filtered by ecological factors and then take place in the design process. The principles of this research are parametric architecture exploiting in design process of ecological-regional models using quantitative-qualitative cognitive maps. The Maranjab Desert is selected as a sample and the studies have been performed. After recognizing the existing layers in the natural site, the layers of both appearance and semantic are analyzed and then converted to the comprehensible elements including point, line and surface of each layer using AutoCAD software. The extracted layers are then combined with the cognitive layers of the designer mind. Combining of extracted site layers is based on the influence of different layers on each other. In every combination, one layer is an indicator and effects on the final output.  There are more choices in this method for a designer. Each layer indicator makes a different geometry than its previous plan. In part of the decision-making process, the "Accidence concept" has also been considered. The paradigms are resulted by the designer decision and conscious "Accidence concept" which is also controlled by the designer. The process is interactive and reciprocal. Due to its planning subject and physical program, "scaling" process decides about the sub-space of the layers and influence on the combinations.
This method is designed to explore the potential ecology and revival of traditional concepts. It is also used in the archetype in the parametric process to create a single consistent model with the aggregation of the mentioned items. The research methods are descriptive - analytical and quantitative - qualitative.

