Abstract
Among the appropriate allocations of emergency/transitional shelters with particular importance, is post-earthquake management, and can extremely reduce the financial and human losses after earthquakes. This research attempts to evaluate and compare the adequacy of two swarm intelligence methods, including Bees and particle swarm optimization algorithms in the allocation of buildings to the emergency shelters that is one of the important spatial issues. Particle Swarm Optimization is one of the Swarm Intelligence Algorithms that is inspired of birds’ behavior. This algorithm has is usually used in continuous optimization problems but is not much mentioned in discrete issues. In this study, by evaluating the weakness and strength points of different versions of DPSO, the authors have tried to develop a new type of such algorithms with high capability in solving the discrete problems. Bee’s algorithm is inspired by the natural foraging behavior of honey bees to find the optimal solution. This algorithm is also developed in order to solve the problem of emergency shelter and finally the results obtained of two algorithms have been evaluated and the operations of them in the optimization have been compared. In order to calibrate the aforementioned algorithms a batch of simulated data has been used and then in order to assess the functionality of the calibrated algorithms the real data of the 7th district of Tehran has been used. Comparing the convergence values of the algorithms represented a much better performance of the innovative DPSO algorithm in order to minimization of the considered objective function. Eventually, the proficiency of the algorithms has been examined based upon repeatability tests/examines. Results of the mentioned tests indicated the precise performance of each algorithm in order to optimization of allocating people in safe areas.



Keywords: Swarm Intelligence, Bees Algorithm, Innovative Discrete Particle Swarm Optimization (DPSO), Temporary Settlement, Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP).

