The objective of the work described in this paper was to experimentally characterize the susceptibility of three candidate automotive structural composites to incidental, low-energy impact damage. The composites, each of which had the same urethane matrix, were produced by a rapid molding process suitable for high-volume automotive applications. The reinforcement for the first composite was a random chopped-glass fiber, while the remaining two were reinforced with stitchbonded carbon-fiber mats, one in a crossply layup, and the other in a quasi-isotropic layup. A pendulum device, representative of events such as tool drops, and a gas-gun projectile, representative of events such as kickups of roadway debris, were used to impact plate specimens. Brick-drop tests were also performed to assess the applicability of the baseline pendulum and gas-gun data to other events. Following the impacts, the damage areas were measured and the plates were cut into either tensile, standard compressive, or compression-after-impact specimens for determining strength degradation. The glass-fiber composite was least susceptible to damage, followed by the crossply carbon-fiber laminate, which had the same thickness. The quasi-isotropic carbon-fiber composite, which was thinner than the other two, sustained the most damage. While compressive strength was significantly degraded by moderate damage in the random-glass-fiber composite, tensile strength was not. On the other hand, both tensile and compressive strengths were degraded in the crossply carbon-fiber laminate (only compressive strength loss was measured in the quasi-isotropic laminate). Compressive strength degradation for a given damage area was similar in the two carbon-fiber laminates. Both showed lesser degradation than did the glass-fiber composite. For the quasi-isotropic carbon-fiber laminate, it was shown that strength degradation produced by an open circular hole provides a reasonable lower bound to the degradation due to an impact damage area of the same size.
