Objective (s): The last evaluation of addiction conditions in Iran in 2008 showed that 70% of the addicts in Iran are employed and about 10% of them have started drug taking in their workplaces. The addiction prevention program in workplaces were practically piloted in 5 provinces in 2003 and generalized to the whole country from 2004. This study was carried out to evaluate the program in order to improve its implementation.
Methods: This analytical descriptive research has been implemented according to health program evaluation method. Data has been collected through reviewing documents of the program history and monitoring since it was established, intensive group discussion sessions with Welfare Organization local authorities, interviewing 10 well-informed individuals, and interviewing program intermediary experts in 58 workplaces. All data were classified in three general categories as achievements, challenges, and techniques to promote the program; and it was finalized in the project steering committeel, and future trends were proposed to develop and promote the program.
Results: The most important achievement of the program from the viewpoint of individuals studied has been awareness and sensitivity increase in employers and employees on addiction. The secondary effect was decline in addiction in workplaces and increase in productivity, absenteeism and leave reduction. The most important challenges of the program have a nearly equal contribution in all three legal-political (macro), operational- structural (middle), and cultural- behavioral (micro) domains. The most important proposed techniques to promote the program were service pack revision, preparing simple and comprehensive style sheet with all stakeholders’ incorporation, signing an agreement with employers and employees representatives, and applying encouraging methods for employers at local levels.
Conclusion: Although there was inadequate periodic data to compare indicators of addiction incidence and prevalence in workplaces, evaluation relied upon ideas of three stakeholders (authorities, intermediary experts, and local facilitators) who were satisfied with the program implementation and required it to be continued and amended. Long-term intervention are needed to include addiction prevention program into health promotion programs in work places and attempt to legalize them. However, in short term service pack revision of addiction prevention in workplaces with incorporation of employers’ representatives, employees, workplace intermediary experts, provincial authorities; environmental rehabilitation and justification at local level and workplaces, are recommended.

