Background and Objective: The verse of "shifaa" (and We send down, of the Quran, that which is a healing and a mercy to the believers; and the unbelievers it increases not, except in loss Al- Israa:82) is the leading document for Quranic  and medical interdisciplinary researches. Despite its popularity, it has not found its particular grounding amongst us. This research was an endeavor to enlighten the ways in order to improve the quantity and quality of medical references to this verse, to put forward the lexical relationship concerning the elements of the verse, and to bring about a novel  method of  documentation and referencing  as pertinent to this verse. 
Materials and Methods: This research yielding   a conceptual analysis of the words in Shifaa verse and their coherence and connection based on the morphology of words and implementation of contrastive analysis takes into account the register of the verse and reconsiders its very delicate and subtle aspects. Thereby, this research puts forward some of the infrastructure in the interdisciplinary approach to research in medicine and Quran.
Results: In the verse of "Shifaa", the term “healing” is the opposite for the word loss and signifies richness, profit, and growth which eventually brings about calmness, evolvement, relief and safety. The foregoing results are achieved only by means of adherence to Quran and faithfulness which alternatively remedies all kind of diseases including loss, constraints, pressure, insecurity, restlessness and the like. Faith is the opposite of oppression and based on its lexical root means seeking refuge and safety under the shadow of Quran, and it is the only prerequisite for the Quranic therapy or healing. Oppression in Quranic concepts implies self-sufficiency and suffering, inattention to Quran, seeking help and security from else which consecutively is a path toward loss and damage.
Conclusion: Reports of the research in Quran point out to the role and importance of the concept of faith in the Holy Quran and these reports provide reminders about the outcome of inattentiveness to the commands of the Holy Quran. To benefit from the Quranic therapy and Shiffa as mentioned in the Holy Quran, calls upon speculation and deep apprehension of the essence of the Quran along with its distinctive aspects. 

Keywords: Quran, Faith, Therapy, Oppression 

