Introduction: Physicians and nurses have to effectively communicate together and believe that none of them can reach to the expected results without another’s help. As a representative of an effective communication, collaboration is process through which physician and nurse discuss healthcare problems of the patients and each one presents his/her information based on mutual respect to complete a healthcare program. The main objective of this study is to define the attitudes of the physicians and nurses occupied in public hospitals of Tehran University of Medical Science about Collaboration.
Method: This is a cross sectional comparative study in which the study population was selected among the physicians and nurses employed in hospitals of Tehran University of Medical sciences. The tool applied in this study consists of two parts. The first part involves demographic characteries of the research samples, whereas the second part includes Jefferson questionnaire to measure attitudes toward physician-nurse collaboration. The collected data were subjected to statistical analysis using SPSS v.14 software package. To obtain research objectives, after collecting required information, data were analyzed using descriptive statistical indexes a and T-test, ?2 test, and ANOVA were used.
Results: In this study 160 sample participated for each group. The results of this study indicated a significant difference (P < 0.001) between mean scores of the physicians (44.5±5.05) with that of nurses (50.8±3.84).
Conclusion: Based on findings of this study, it was concluded that it is required to do some cultural practices about the cooperation between physicians and nurses. In addition, it seems that holding workshops to define the objectives and strategies for creation of collaboration toward physicians and nurses is of highest significance for medical and nursing students. Through elucidating the attitude of physician and nurse toward collaboration, this research can provide some strategies for creation of effective communication between physician and nurse through which both can be benefited.

