Background: Performance indicators can be appropriate tools for designing, implementing, and evaluating education, research, management, and other programs in universities and higher education institutions. Using performance indicators, one can investigate the past, current, and desired status of universities and compare it with the existing standards. Objective: The present paper aims to determine the weight of the performance evaluation indicators of nongovernmental–nonprofit higher education institutions in research, educational, and environmental dimensions, along with providing a ranking for them. Method: Participants consisted of nongovernmental-nonprofit institutions of higher education as well as members of monitoring and evaluation bodies of higher education centers in Kermanshah, Kurdistan, Hamedan, Lorestan, and Ilam provinces (n = 45). All members were asked to fill out the performance evaluation questionnaire. The final weight of indicators was determined through analytic hierarchy process. Performance evaluation indicators were collected through questionnaires in the form of a self-report. Results: Results showed that the educational indicators were more important than other indicators for evaluating the nongovernmental-nonprofit higher education centers. The weight of educational dimension was more than other dimensions (0.42). The weights of research and environmental dimensions were almost the same (0.29). The maximum weight of the indictors that were placed first in educational, research, and environmental dimensions were respectively 0.39, 0.30 and 0.17. The range of weights was larger in educational indicators than in other dimensions. The rating of each institution was determined in educational, research, and environmental dimensions. Discussion and Conclusion: When evaluating nongovernmental-nonprofit higher education institutions, the educational indicators should be prioritized. By ranking the institutions according to educational, research, and environmental dimensions, a more accurate image is provided and their comparison becomes easier. Implications of the ranking system were discussed.
