It is obvious, most of population of our country consists of teenagers & youth and success of this large group in near future, strongly depends on their official & institutional education. Meanwhile all know that the issue of children’s  success is the main and inseparable concern of families and education authorities of each country. Most experts in the area of education regard relation of family members as an important factor for student’ education achievements.
Also many people and groups have taken the issue into consideration. However, this old ulcer has lead families to the edge of destruction and disappointed parent and teachers from continuing their valuable path.
Objective of this study is achieving core variable drawn up from the data gathered in  the area of “family relations which affect success and failure of the students’ education.”  For this purpose 32 participants  (16 mother & 16 students) were selected from firest grade students of Shahriar Town’s High Schools, through directed & theoric sampling up to data saturation by means of semi-structured deep interviews, with the grounded theory method. Then the data were analyzed by the method suggested by Strauss & Corbin consisting of coding (open, pivotal & optional), and total 98 primary code and 56 final primary codes were achieved from the interviewed people. At the next stages of the analysis, a main variable named “communication” was achieved. The term “communication” was selected for naming this core variable because it could convey considerable diversities derived from the data. 
Findings show that  “family relations affecting success & failure of the students’ education”  are composed of multilayer & complicated factors. Finally the results indicated that relations of family members, responsible behavior of the parents toward thire children, relations & interaction of the spouses with each  other all & all affect students’ educational success & failure. The results are specific for this group and its generalization should be considered by caution.
