Background: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most common developmental-neurological disorder in children, the problems of which remain after puberty. Early diagnosis and intervention of this disorder in the home and school environment is essential to decrease the problems caused by it. Early diagnosis and intervention requires epidemiologic studies. The studies on the prevalence of ADHD have had different results, due to applying different criteria, definitions, evaluators and instruments. Objective: The present paper aims to conduct a meta-analysis on the epidemiologic studies of ADHD among Iranian elementary school students. Method: The research method was meta-analysis. All related research reports were collected by referring to domestic and foreign databases. 17 case studies, conducted from1991 to 2011 throughout Iran involving 29714 participants, were used in this meta-analysis. The results of the 17 case studies were meta-analyzed using binomial effect size display and Woolf’s inverse variance (1986; Hooman, 2008) for the fixed effect model. All statistical operations were performed using the second version of the Comprehensive Meta-Analysis Software (Borenstein, Hedges,Higgins & Rothestein, 2005, translated by Delavar and Ganji, 2011). Results:The results showed that mixed-effect size in the conducted studies was 0.097 and reduced to 0.095 with elimination of one study. The general prevalence rate of ADHD was 8.97 with elimination of two studies and sensitivity analysis. Moreover, the results revealed that the prevalence rate of ADHD among boys and girls was respectively 9.89 and 2.47 with elimination of one study and sensitivity analysis. The meta-analysis results also indicated that the prevalence rate of subtypes of inattention, hyperactivity-impulsivity and combined subtypes were 7.75, 4.93 and 5.04 respectively. Conclusion: The results of present meta-analytical research is consistent with those of many related studies in terms of the prevalence rate of ADHD, the proportion of disorder between girls and boys and also the prevalence rate of subtypes among Iranian elementary school students.
