Introduction: One of the proposed issues in modern education is the integration of new technologies with education. Information and communication technology is applied more than other technologies in the past few decades. The objective of this study is to investigate the effect of contextual factors on knowledge about information and communication technology (ICT) and using it by faculty members in Isfahan University of Medical Sciences.
Methods: This descriptive cross-sectional study was performed in Isfahan University of Medical Sciences on 234 medical teachers sampled through simple quota. Study instrument was a researcher made questionnaire for evaluating status of teachers’ knowledge and use of ICT. Content validity of questionnaire was approved by ten experts of education. Reliability of the questionnaire was 0.85 as measured by Chronbach’s Alpha.  After gathering data, it was analyzed using descriptive and inferential statistical tests.
Results: Data achieved from 201 completed questionnaires showed that the mean score of self-evaluation was 3.98±1.15 for knowledge about computer and 2.98±0.71 for knowledge of computer. The knowledge about computer was higher among males compared to women, assistant professors compared to other scientific levels, and younger than 35 years compared to older. This differences was significant (p < 0.05). A negative correlation was also observed investigating the relationship between knowledge and use of computer and internet with teaching years (p < 0.05). Moreover, 62.2% of teachers used computers for 4 hours or more. Teachers younger than 35, used computer more than older. This difference was also significant considering clinical and nonclinical groups (p < 0.05). 
Conclusion: With regard to the results of this study, the knowledge and rate of using ICT is varied among faculties and lower than expected. This knowledge and use also reduce for clinical or old teachers. Therefore we should notice these factors for designing faculty development program

