The objective of this work is to present an integral methodology to numerically model the wear phenomena by friction in a polymer–metal contact pair, showing the development of a numerical tool to implement a wear model in the commercial finite element code Abaqus. The contact pair in which this work is based corresponds to the contact between a guide shoe insert for an elevator, made of thermoplastic polyurethane elastomers (TPU), and the corresponding guide, made of steel. Tribometer tests are planned to fit the numerically implemented wear model as well as to validate it. These tests are briefly described as an introduction to the numerical fitting of the data from which the wear model is obtained. The numerical tool in which the wear model in a polymer–steel contact pair is implemented is based on a methodology that combines the use of the user subroutine Umeshmotion, which offers the possibility of implementing a wear model in any general form, several routines to result access, and the adaptive meshing technique, a mesh smoothing tool available in Abaqus based on ALE (Augmented Lagrangian Eulerian) methods. With this technique, it is possible to eliminate material during the simulation as well as to maintain a high-quality mesh throughout an analysis by allowing the mesh to move independently of the material. As the tests that are carried out in the tribometer to fit and to validate the wear model require long travel distances and a large number of cycles, a real simulation of those tests would require a huge calculation time. Therefore, to simulate the wear process equivalent to the travelled distances in the tests in an affordable simulation time, an accelerated numerical procedure of the wear process is also proposed in this work. To numerically implement the wear model, and as it is usually stated in polymers, it is previously necessary to set up a procedure for determining the relationship between the friction coefficient and the contact pressure for the material and countermaterial contact pair. Finally, a validation of the methodology with a new wear tribometer test under different conditions to those stated to characterise the model is also presented.
