Distributed watershed models are increasingly being used to support decisions about alternative management strategies in the areas of land use change, climate change, water allocation, and pollution control. For this reason it is important that these models pass through a careful calibration and uncertainty analysis. To fulfil this demand, in recent years, scientists have come up with various uncertainty analysis techniques for watershed models. To determine the differences and similarities of these techniques we compared five uncertainty analysis procedures: Generalized Likelihood Uncertainty Estimation (GLUE), Parameter Solution (ParaSol), Sequential Uncertainty FItting algorithm (SUFI-2), and a Bayesian framework implemented using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) and Importance Sampling (IS) techniques. As these techniques are different in their philosophies and leave the user some freedom in formulating the generalized likelihood measure, objective function, or likelihood function, a literal comparison between these techniques is not possible. As there is a small spectrum of different applications in hydrology for the first three techniques, we made this choice according to their typical use in hydrology. For Bayesian inference, we used a recently developed likelihood function that does not obviously violate the statistical assumptions, namely a continuous-time autoregressive error model. We implemented all these techniques for the soil and water assessment tool (SWAT) and applied them to the Chaohe Basin in China. We compared the results with respect to the posterior parameter distributions, performances of their best estimates, prediction uncertainty, conceptual bases, computational efficiency, and difficulty of implementation. The comparison results for these categories are listed and the advantages and disadvantages are analyzed. From the point of view of the authors, if computationally feasible, Bayesian-based approaches are most recommendable because of their solid conceptual basis, but construction and test of the likelihood function requires critical attention.
