
Background & Aims:  Autopsies are recognized as valuable medical procedures. A number of digital radiology techniques, including multislice CT, MRI, and photogrammetry with 3D surface scanning have the potential to change traditional autopsy and improve the reliability of results. Virtual Autopsy is a non-invasive procedure with no damage to the tissues. Noninvasive virtual autopsying could, in some cases, replace the invasive examination altogether. Use of a Picture Archiving and Communications System (PACS) and teleradiology) can be considered useful tools in medico-legal investigations. 
Materials & Methods: This study is a systematic review using key words "Virtual autopsy", " imaging technologies ", "forensics" and "techniques" and "PACS", among about 325 research and review papers in Persian and English in the field of Virtual Autopsy from electronic databases such as CINAHL, Science direct, Ovid, Scopus, SID, Magiran, PubMed, Google scholar; and finally 82 article were assessed. This study has been in 15-year period from 1997 to 2013. Finally, 82 articles in Persian and English.
Results: The results of this study show that medical autopsies rates are declining worldwide. New radiology imaging techniques has the potential to transform the traditional medical autopsy. The minimally invasive nature of virtopsy makes it more acceptable in cases where religious or ethical concerns arise. Virtual autopsy findings can be reviewed and audited in an objective manner at any time by any professional via the use of a Picture Archiving and Communications System (PACS) and teleradiology.
Conclusion: Results of studies indicate that findings identified during physical autopsy often raise additional questions that can be answered by virtual autopsy. In some countries, virtual autopsy is now used routinely for forensic work. Concluding from our observations, unenhanced virtual autopsy represents a valuable tool for documentation of pathologic findings.
Key words: "Virtual autopsy", " imaging technologies ", "forensics" and "techniques" and "PACS". 


