Identifying barriers and challenges is the first step to development of rural tourism. 
Therefore, the purpose of this study is the identification of the views of  villagers of Dena region  in Kohgiluyeh & Boyer-Ahmad province about the barriers and challenges of tourism development in this area. For this purpose, simple stratified surveying and sampling methods with appropriate appointment were used.At the first phase, tourism villages of Dena region were identified and by using sampling table, the sample volume of 115 rural families has been estimated. Then the share of each village from the sample was determined. One male and one female ( a couple)  from each house were interviewed as systematic. In total 230 rural men and women were studied.The tool for collecting data was the questionnaires which their face validity was confirmed by experts and its reliability, by a pilot study with Cronbach’s Alpha value of more than 0.57 for different variables was obtained.  SPSS statistical software and exploratory factor analysis technique were used for data analysis. The conducted factor analysis  extracted 8 barriers of rural tourism development in Dena region , which defined 66.45 percentage of total variance.These barriers including: organizational barriers (%32.34), social barriers (%11.65), welfare barriers (%4.83), facilities barriers (%4.07), cultural barriers (%3.89), communicational barriers (%3.68), people barriers (%3.10), and finally economic barriers (%2.87). Therefore ,for  rural tourism development  in Dena region, it is recommended to establish private tourism stations or units in the objective villages,, in order to while guiding the tourists  , organize the information systems and install  and equip guide signs.  From social aspect, through holding training workshops and tourism festivals, make ready the host society for accepting tourism and in addition, for development of tourism infrastructures in Dena region, supporting and encouraging policies shall be used. On this basis, optimum servicing in the field of infrastructural affairs such as communicating methods, water, electricity and sport and hygienic facilities can also be effective.


