Abstract: In general, standardization of the systems and manufacturing processes in pattern of quality management system is a key objective in the industry organizations in defense, so that the most important aspect of this is optimal implementation of the system. For optimizing the implementation of the standard ISO9001, It's important to cover four main factors: 1-Customer Satisfaction, 2-Conformity to product requirement, 3-Characteristics and trends of processes and products, 5- Suppliers Subject. In this study there are two main purposes: 
1-Assesment of amount of implementation of statistical techniques.
2-Identification and determination of effectiveness application of statistical prioritize techniques in organization for analyzing in four strategic issues.
In this research, we use library studies and audit reports of Iran's defense standard center furthermore exploratory survey and interviews with academic and industry experts. In this study, a model designed to applying statistical techniques for the effective implementation of quality management systems. The core of the study is to present a theory quality framework based on the 1-8 in ISO9001:2008. Then an applied, comprehensive pattern is presented in which the main topics of quality management system confirmed in paragraph 4-8 of the above standard are divided into quantitative and subjective indices. The statistical techniques of ISO10017:2003 will be offered for them, in each step, we will present analytical conclusions based on the data found. The research method used was a descriptive survey design and conceptual framework of the research with academic and industry experts, consultants, and auditors in Iran's defense standard center, through the questionnaire, the experts' opinions on the importance and status were analyzed with using statistical techniques. On the basis of the results of the data analysis, it reveals that the experts and managers of the organization stated the following techniques are important:
1-Pareto charts
2-Histograms
3-Process capability analysis 
4-Statistical process control charts
 Also by assessing of implementation of statistical techniques in the defense industry, the following factors for effective implementation of them are determined:
1-Planning and implementing of training for staff
2-Creating the right and dynamic culture in organization
4-Commitement and support of the organization's senior management
5-Allocation of funds in organization 
6-Deployment of a robust and proper process and structures
7-The implementation of statistical techniques by an independent unit
8-Prepare, develop and implement your long-term strategy for the use of statistical techniques in order to optimize quality.

