
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Herbal medicine had been excessively used for treatment of many diseases in traditional medicine. Because of effect of fructose on lipid profile and hepatic enzymes, it was decided to study the effect of extract of different parts of Citrullus colocynthis on lipid profile and hepatic enzymes in fructose-fed male rats. 
METHODS: In this experimental study, 63 adult male Wistar rats weighting 200-300 (g) were used. After fructose 10% induced in drinking water for 8 weeks, the animals were randomly divided into 7 groups: control, Fructose10%, aqueous extracts of seed, hydro-alcoholic extracts of seed, aqueous extracts of crust, hydro-alcoholic extracts of crust and hydro-alcoholic extracts of pulp. The extracts (200mg/kg) were administered orally and conducted for 2 terminal weeks. The animals were weighed and anesthetized for the serum blood collection to determine lipid profile and hepatic enzymes after at least a 12-h fast with manufacture kits and autoanalyzer machine. 
FINDINGS: LDL/HDL ratio in aqueous extracts of crust group (2.46±1.08) increased in comparison with control and fructose groups (0.98±0.1 and 0.98± 0.15, respectively) (p < 0.01). Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) in aqueous extracts of seed and aqueous extracts of crust groups decreased and increased in comparison with control and fructose groups, respectively (p < 0.05). Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) in aqueous extracts of crust group increased in comparison with control and fructose groups (p < 0.01), also alkaline phosphatase (ALP) in aqueous extracts of crust group increased (p < 0.05) but this enzyme in aqueous extracts of seed group decreased significantly in comparison with control (p < 0.01) and fructose (p < 0.05) group. 
CONCLUSION: According to the results, crust of Citrullus colocynthis has negative effect on lipid profile, hepatic enzymes and hepatotoxicity and seed of this fruit has decrease effect on lipid profile and hepatic enzymes.

KEY WORDS: Citrullus colocynthis, Fructose, Lipid, Hepatic enzyme.

