
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Aloe Vera is a medicinal plant that has diverse biological properties such as antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activity. Atherosclerosis is one of the main causes of death in the world where in the new studies have been introduced as an inflammatory disease. Hence the use of lipid-lowering drugs and inflammation may be useful in preventing or controlling it. This study evaluated the anti-atherosclerotic effects of Aloe vera in hypercholesterolemic rabbits.
METHODS: This experimental study was performed on 32 New Zealand male rabbits weighing 1800-2000 gr. Animal model of atherosclerosis was developed in 32 male rabbits using high-cholesterol diet (cholesterol 1%). Rabbits in four experimental groups (n=8) were treated for 30 days: normal diet group, high-cholesterol diet group, high-cholesterol diet group with Aloe vera gel (3.2%v/v per day in their drinking water), and Aloe vera with the normal diet group. At the beginning and end of study rabbits blood was used for total cholesterol, triglyceride, LDL, HDL, FBS measuring by enzymatic methods and CRP. The presence of fatty streaks in arteries of animals with histopathological methods was investigated and compared.
FINDINGS: High cholesterol diet group was significantly increased total cholesterol and CRP (p < 0.05). Results indicated that the use of Aloe vera in the third group with high-cholesterol diet significantly decreased total cholesterol (576.88±292.52 vs. 1059±79.11) and CRP in this group than high-cholesterol group (p < 0.05). Other lipoproteins after studying in groups 2 and 3 compared with normal diet and Aloe vera alone had a significant increase (p < 0.05), but they have not significant difference with each other. The use of Aloe vera along with high-cholesterol diet significantly reduced the formation of fatty streaks in the high-cholesterol group (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The results show that the consumption of Aloe vera by knowing the impact of cholesterol and inflammation as major risk factors for atherosclerosis can be beneficial effects in controlling this disease prevention.

KEY WORDS: Atherosclerosis, Aloe vera, Inflammation, C- reactive protein. 

