Objective:  Health of old people is one of the critical  issues in many societies that needs to accurate 
health policy making and adjust planning in health issues of elderly. The present study designed to 
compare the efficacy of the two traditional and electronic training methods in nutritional issues in order 
to life style modification in old people to develop of healthy elderly. 
Methods: This survey was a quasi-experimental method via applying the Pre-test and Post-test among 
65+ years old people in a retirement association of Sari province, Mazandaran state. By simple random 
sampling method, 60 old people were selected, and then trained in two separated classes to 15 persons as 
women and men (30 persons) via film technique. The other method was a traditional which applied in the 
two separated classes of 15 persons as women and men (30 persons) by book technique. The 
questionnaire applied to measure of nutritional knowledge made up by the health center. Data were 
described by using SPSS software in accordance to descriptive statistics indexes (mean and standard 
deviation), and inferential statistics indexes (independent T and dependent T) were used in order to 
generalize results. 
Findings:  The mean score of increasing knowledge in training group by film was 18/57 and the mean 
score in training group by book was 16/90 (T =5/299, df= 58). To satisfaction evaluating, the mean score 
in training group by film was 59 and the mean score in training group by book was 35/73 (T =1/96, 
df=58). 
Conclusion: Based on results training of old people by electronic method as a film is more effective than 
traditional method to increasing of nutritional knowledge in elderly. On the other hand, they had more 
satisfaction to life style modification by using film method in comparison with traditional method as 
book reading technique. Also, the training cost of the elderly via educational film is lower than training 
by book. So, should be suggested to consider in training by film rather than book as an efficient and 
effective method to improve of elderly health. 
 
 
Key words: Elderly, Traditional training, Electronic training, Efficacy, Healthy life style, Educational 
methods
