Objective: The present study describes assessing physical health status of old people in different age 
groups in Tehran metropolitan area. The outcomes of this study could help to health policy makers to 
develop of better health policy in gerontology field by determine of priorities of care in different age 
groups of old people and effect of socio-economic components on elder’s’ physical health. 
Method: This was a cross sectional study in 2010. The participants were (N=402) aged 60 years old and 
over which have underrepresented from Shahid Beheshti university. The survey methods were via face-
to-face interviews, and just in a few cases as telephone interviews. The instrument to data collection 
included demographic questionnaire, SF-36 short form and ADL tools. Data analyzed by Stata and SPSS 
Ver.15 through t-test, one-way ANOVA. Regression models applied as well.  
Findings: Based on the results 45% of elderly were in (60-69) years old, 36.5% were in (70-79) years 
old, and 18.5% were 80+ years old. The median age was 71.5±8.9  years. Regarding ADL, 18.2% of 
elderly were dependent; 22.3% were semi dependent, and 59.5% of participants were independent to do 
activity of daily living. Regarding physical functioning, 29.6% of elderly had severe limitation; 32.6% 
had moderate limitation, and 37.8% had no limitation in their physical function. Components of age, sex, 
marital status, education, job, income, insurance, housing, and living with whom had significant 
association with physical health status in old people. Although based on regression model and 
considering in effect of conflict variables, age and sex had more effect to predict of activity of daily 
living in old people. Age, sex, to be alone, and financial problems were the most predictors on physical 
function in aged people. 
Conclusion: The important components that effect on physical health of elderly related to fragile elderly 
from aspect of socio economic factors. Based on the results of this study aged elderly and old women 
were more disable to do Activity of Daily Living (ADL). Regarding physical function; age, sex, living 
with whom, and financial dependency were significant components in relation with physical function. In 
other words, older people, women, elderly who did not live with their spouse, and elderly who were 
dependent in financial aspect to others had more difficulty in physical function. 
 
Key words: Elderly, Socio-economic components, ADL, Quality of life  
