Objective(s): The purpose of the present study is to better understand relationships between mental 
health components (Psychological distress, Psychological wellbeing) and utilization of health services 
and community aged care services among the Iranian elderly living in Sydney metropolitan area.  These 
findings will, in part, fill the gap in gerontological knowledge and also help to health policy makers, 
social fairness, increasing fairness to the Iranian elderly migrants, and also increasing their more access 
to the aged care services. 
Material & methods: In this cross sectional study 302 old people were selected via a random sample 
among 1209 Iranian aged people 65 years old and over migrated in Australia. In this study 302 old 
people 65 years old and over participated who lived in Sydney state’s of Australia for at least 6 months 
prior to the survey. This study has done in 2005-7. Multiple methods were utilized to collect data 
including telephone interviews, face to face interviews, or a written survey instrument by mail. The tools 
used were based on the “annual elderly health survey in 2000” through Australian ministry of health. The 
mental health instruments applied were psychological well being (Yeild), and   psychological distress 
(K6). The service utilization tools included utilization of aged care services (basic and supportive), and 
use of health services. T test, ANOVA and liner regression applied to predict of mental health 
components by SPSS ver.15 soft wear. 
Results: demonstrated that the majority of respondents reported feeling so sad and nervous most of the 
time in the last four weeks. The bulk of respondents had moderate level of psychological distress. About 
one quarter of respondents had lower level of feeling of wellbeing in the last four weeks preceding this 
study. Use of health services and community basic aged care services are predicted by mental health 
status of Iranian elderly respondents. However, mental health status could not predict utilization of 
community supportive aged care services.  
Conclusion: Generally, use of interpreters and organized community services were predicted with 
mental health components among the Iranian elderly migrants. 
 
Key words: Elderly, Community basic and supportive aged care services, Psychological wellbeing, 
Psychological distress
