Abstract
Introduction: Promoting the quality of services in hospital emergency departments can lead to greater patient satisfaction, reduced complaints and improved health quality. To this end, understanding the strengths and weaknesses of the current status of hospital emergency departments can help improve the quality of services in the future.
Objective: To evaluate the quality of health care of emergency centers of Rasht in 2013
Materials and Methods: This study was a descriptive and analytical one, carried out in 7 teaching, training centers including Razi hospital emergency departments, Poursina, Dr. Heshmat, Alzahra, Amiralmomenin, Shafa and Velayat in Rasht province. Data were collected using a questionnaire consisting of two parts with77 questions; first part having 13 questions related to the in-charge information and the second part consisting of 64 questions related to structure, process and the function of emergency department. Data analysis software was SPSS18 using descriptive and inferential indicators. Hospitals with more than 90 percentage points for the process, structure and function were considered favorable, 71-90% were relatively favorable, 50-70% were at middle level and less than 50% were considered as weak. 
Results: Average number of active beds in the emergency department of the hospitals was 19.8. As shown, 85.72 % of the investigated emergency departments were relatively favorable and 14.28 % were favorable. Regarding distribution of human resources, Dr. Heshmat training and medical center with 88 %, in environment and facilities area, Velayat training and medical center with 99.5 %, in management affairs Poursina, Razi,Velayat and Dr. Heshmat with 94.54 percentage, in emergency department rules, Razi training and medical center with 96.3  percentage were in  better situation. Average gained point in the field of educational process of training and medical centers in Rasht was 66.28%. 
Conclusion: Structure and function of the investigated training and medical centers of Rasht in terms of human resources, environment and facilities, managing and emergency department rules were relatively favorable and favorable and in the field of educational processes were at average level. Therefore, given the nature of emergency departments, it seems that paying more attentions to standardization, and particularly empowering of human resources are necessary. Continuous education of the physicians and nurses could be very helpful, too. 

