Abstract
Introduction: Specialty choices among medical students is an important Issue.Economic, social and cultural factors are influential in this respect.
Objective: To determine the factors associated with Medical Students tendency 
Materials and Methods: This cross sectional study was conducted on all second semester, students, Extern and intern. We used census method for selecting case of study. Data were collected using a two part questionnaire consisting of demographic features and a questionnaire that was adapted from AHP and translated into Persian with validity and reliability confirmed through content validity.The data were analized by descriptive and analytical tests using SPSS 17 softwere.   
Results: In total, 191 medical students participated in this study. average student age was 23.07±2.81, 66.5% were women and 85.3 percent were single, 25.1 %, second semester, 29.3 %, Student, 20.9 %, Extern and 24.6 %  were intern. The priorities in female participants were Dermatology,Radiology and Cardiology and in male were orthopedy ,ophtalmology and cardiology . The preference in the selection of specialization courses was for education, including the Cardiology and Neurosergury in second semesters and in Student, Extern and intern were Dermatology. Overall,  dermatology (41.4%)Radiology (9.4%) and Ophthalmology (7.9%) were the most favored specialty choices. According chi-squer test, of the variables, studied military service related problems P  < 0/005)) and gender (P < 0/002) were significantly associated with specialty choice. The most important factors in student specialty choice, were individual and economic factors .From economic factors, labor market (2.91 ± 1.04) and between individual factors, personal interest (3.39 ± 0.86) were the most associated factors with specialty choice (P < 0/0001). Followed by other factors, including future revenues from economic factors and occupational factors, was private job after graduation from college. Among all of the relevant factors, economic factors, (p < 0/0001), were the most important ones.
Conclusion: Personal interest and future earning were the most important factors and dermatology ,radiology and ophtalmology were the most favored specialty Choices among Guilan University of Medical Sciences students Therefore, these factors should be considered by the respective authorities when choosing the field and plan to develop praograms for the graduates.  

