Shelling is one of the typical rolling contact fatigue (RCF) failures of railway wheels. Creepage between wheels and rails due to rolling radius difference in curves is inevitable on railway tracks. Therefore, there are tangential stresses and slip phenomena on wheel treads. Eventually, initiation of RCF cracks being the origin of shelling is accelerated by creepage.

The objective of the present paper is to evaluate RCF property of railway wheel steel. The effect of the slip ratio on the RCF strength of the railway wheel steel was evaluated. RCF tests were conducted using two cylindrical contact specimens under water lubrication at a slip ratio of 0.0–1.0%. The range of slip ratio is determined to assume a creepage between wheel and rail during curving. As a result, it was found that the traction coefficient increased with the increase in the slip ratio, and the fatigue strength decreased simultaneously. The results were evaluated by a shakedown map and Hirakawa’s RCF map. Experimental fatigue limits could be expressed more precisely by the criterion of Hirakawa’s RCF map than that expressed by the well-known shakedown map.

Stress intensity factors (SIFs) of the cracks produced by the RCF test were calculated by finite element (FE) analysis where the effect of water pressure due to the penetration of water into the cracks is taken into account. Two peaks of the maximum tangential SIF occurred during one cycle of rolling contact. The direction of the crack propagation was estimated by the maximum tangential stress criteria. The results of the RCF test showed that the cracks were initiated at the surface, propagated obliquely in the depth direction and then branched into two directions. One was towards the surface and the other was towards the depth. These two crack directions were inspected experimentally, corresponding to the estimated crack directions from the two peaks of SIF by FE analysis. The effect of slip ratio on RCF crack propagation was discussed by using the SIFs of the RCF cracks where water penetration into the cracks was considered.
