Abstract
Background and Objective : In recent years, many industries activities such as refining crude oil,
aluminum and zinc production, ship repair and construction, loading and unloading minerals and
chemicals, as a development center in Bandar Abbas of southern Iran, has exacerbated the pollution
and destruction of sensitive ecosystems of coastal region water. Therefore, determination of trace
elements, making the harmful effects on marine ecosystems including aquatic and consequent effects,
puts man’s life in sediments of coastal waters and which is important. Based on this research
measurement of the amount of heavy metals Ni, Zn, Cu and Pb in coastal sediments is the target of
Bandar Abbas area.
Materials and Methods: All stages of sample digestion and sedimentation according to standard
methods (MOOPAM) were performed. The amount of heavy metals Ni, Zn, Cu and Pb in coastal
sediments by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) was measured.
Results : On this basis, the average concentration of heavy metals copper, zinc, nickel and lead in
sediments, respectively 35.2 ± 0.2, 89.1 ± 0.3, 27.9 ± 0.3 and 149.6 ± 0.1 (?g g-1) dry weight sediment,
has been calculated. These values mean concentrations of elements in the sediments are above the
global and domestic and foreign regions standard.
Conclusion: Statistical analysis (ANOVA: Single Factor) showed that concentrations of heavy metals
copper, zinc, nickel and lead in sediment are significant differences between the crossings. Two
elements lead and nickel with a coefficient of correlation 0.8368 have the highest range then
respectively the elements lead and zinc with a coefficient of correlation 0.5270, nickel and copper with
a coefficient of correlation 0.1722, nickel and zinc with a coefficient depends on 0.1704 and copper
and zinc with correlation coefficient of 0.0890 are placed at the next step. The correlation coefficient
between positive and significant lead and nickel, lead and zinc, nickel and copper, nickel and zinc
finally determined that the source of pollution in the sediments of these elements is the same.
Coefficient of negative correlation between different elements showed that the resource of the
sediment for these heavy metals is the same.
