Sound in public urban spaces is often considered in negative terms as both intrusive and undesirable – its referred to as noise! However, this issue is multi-facetted and goes much deeper than simply reducing levels. There are many positive aspects of a soundscape.

In an attempt to progress thinking on positive soundscapes and move towards more practical planning approaches and decision making tools for soundscape assessment, this paper proposes an approach traditionally used in product development and manufacturing quality – The Kano Model. The approach is captured in the form of a broader framework which covers: the composition of a soundscape in objective terms; the factors affecting whether it might be perceived as positive; and how the Kano model for product development can be used as a means of understanding the range of applicability of approaches to create positive soundscapes (including several novel approaches which are the subject of other papers in this issue). It can be considered to be complementary with previous frameworks, some of which have concentrated on sound sources, others on the factors affecting perception or even as a model for understanding individual evaluation. In this case the motivation behind the framework is to help assess the likely impact of practical interventions on the positive aspects of a soundscape.

The framework proposes that the meaning of “positive” for a public space is quite different for three types of people, each with a different level of direct engagement with the soundscape: planners; serious listeners; users of the space. The first two are influenced by the soundscape itself, either in meeting legislation and reducing nuisance, or as an artistic or creative opportunity. However the third, arguably most important group of people, users of the space, are more concerned with the space itself and have their perception of it influenced by the soundscape, which is an inconvenient and highly complex intermediate step. This influence is largely determined by their activity e.g. reading, holding a conversation, shopping or sightseeing.

The paper discusses the further implementation of the framework, and how barriers to the wider application of the concept of positive soundscapes might be overcome. It shows how adapting an approach previously used in automotive sound quality can be adapted for urban soundscapes. It concludes with recommendations for taking the framework forward as a practical approach.
