The present series of papers summarizes the results of a three-year research project on the realistic simulation of sound fields in car passenger compartments using a combined Finite Element (FE) and Geometrical Acoustics (GA) approach. The simulations are conducted for the whole audible frequency range with the loudspeakers of the car audio system as the sound sources. The challenges faced during the project relate to fundamental questions regarding the realistic sound field simulation in small enclosures with strong modal and diffraction effects. While Part I of this series of papers focusses on the determination of the boundary and source conditions for the simulation model of the car compartment, the present paper, denoted here as Part II, presents extensive objective and subjective comparisons of the corresponding room acoustic measurement and simulation results.

By applying the FE method to the low frequency part of the room transfer function (RTF) the study aims at the quantification of potential objective and subjective benefits with regard to the simulation quality in small rooms, when compared to a purely geometrical acoustics approach. The main challenges and limitations in the simulation domain are due to the very small volume, the difficult to determine source and boundary conditions and the considerable diffraction effects (especially at the seats) in the car passenger compartments. In order to keep the complexity of the FE simulations at a manageable level, all boundary conditions were described by acoustic surface impedances and no fluid-structural coupling was considered in the FE simulation model.

While the results of the study reveal that an overall good agreement regarding the energy distribution in time and frequency domain is generally possible even in such complex enclosures, the results also clearly show the limitations of the impedance boundary approach in the FE domain as well as the strong sensitivity of the simulation results with regard to the uncertainty in the boundary and source conditions in both simulation domains. It can thus be concluded, that possible fields of application of the FE extension in room acoustic simulations lie in the prediction of the modally dominated low frequency part of the RTF of well defined rooms and in the prediction of sound fields that are strongly affected by near-field or diffraction effects as in the car passenger compartment. However, due to the considerable problems in the determination of realistic boundary conditions for the FE model, improved measurement techniques are urgently needed to further improve the overall simulation quality.
