Of the interesting branches of archaeology functions enlivening the human cultures, is to discuss about the thought, traditions and human believes of various societies; doing that, the religious monuments are the most important informative resources. This paper is trying to discuss about the tradition background of Saq?-Kh?neh and the setting of scarifying some elements such as water in ancient Iran while mentioning their external characteristics. Therefore, an example of the old traditions in form of new Islamic customs among the Iranians has mentioned. In the first part, the characteristics of Saq?-Kh?neh and the relation of such parameters with cultural continuity of special social norms in the Iranian culture have emphasized. In the second part, The Arb?b Mirz? Saq?-Kh?neh of Shahr-e Kurd, a worth mentioning of Saq?-Kh?neh, has introduced by studying its main characteristics; finally, it has been concluded that these characteristics can be seen in form, decoration and function of this example. Based on the lab and field studies, the methodology of this paper is descriptive, historical analytic. So, it has been observed that, studying the background of the Saq?-Kh?neh and stemming the Pre-Islamic norms and values, it is possible to trace the reason of the appearance of such monument as an important indicator in the cultural geography of Iran and the continuing belief of Muslim Iranians. As well as, by investigating the Saq?-Kh?neh applying semiotics and its architecture, a well-documented recognition of the ethnic thought continuation in new framework has presented. According to the presented documents on its remained sacred aspects in the modern society with less functional difference and their continuity and using their symbolic parts by modern art as well, it is cleared that the requirement and glory of old values supporting this objective symbol is still stable and spiritual; Saq?-Kh?neh is a valuable treasury of old components and it can be understood from the history that its characteristics is a reason on the continuity of  believes of people over times.
