Background and Objective: Rivers are one of the most important water resources with a wide scope
of applications. On the other hand, any entrance of polluting items into rivers may cause different
physical and chemical changes. Therefore it is necessary to have a good knowledge of these
parameters and changing process of them. Meanwhile Khersan River is one of the greatest headbranch
of Karoon as the most important of State’s rivers. This is due to supplying of major part of
required water for civil, rural, agricultural purposes. The present paper intends to specify any physical
and chemical parameters of Khersan River (including Nitrate, Phosphate, Liquid oxygen, Biochemical
Oxygen demand, Temperature & pH). It is accompanied with a study of annual changes of it. Since
there was not a real research on Khersan River with such dimensions, therefore it could be useful in
the field of different applications most of which is dam construction on the concerned river.
Method: In order to perform some physical and chemical tests, we performed 12 steps of sampling on
monthly basis. All water samples belonged to 6 stations through the river way. We applied standard
sampling method and test procedures.
Findings and Discussion: According to the findings, there is maximum rate of water temperature
changes at concerned stations through July & August. Therefore it may find a reducing process and
minimum rate in February as well. pH rate of water was in optimized scope in all stations and through
all months of the year (6.5-9.5 mg/liter). It was at minimum rate at all stations through the September
& October. The quantity of liquid oxygen in water was in optimized scope (more than 5 mg/liter) in
all stations and all months of the year. Then it may reach to the minimum rate through July & August
and then to its maximum amount in winters. Biochemical oxygen demand of water had the maximum
rate at station No. 1 in the middle of October. Generally we had biochemical oxygen demand more
than permitted maximum rate. The process of nitrate changes in all stations was in optimized scope in
all months of the year.
Conclusion: Any agricultural activities and distribution of agricultural lands besides this river and
also presence of neighboring villages and civil areas, have great roles in pollution of the river water.
