Abstract
Backgroun and objective:The scarce water resources and Poor quality drinking water with the lack of a proper sewage collection and disposal system and increasing management problems due to rapid population growth made Islamic Republic of Iran to pay priority attention to the water and sewerage problems of districts in its five-year development plan. In this regard, water and sewerage project in Bandar Anzali became a priority by Guilan province Urban Water and Sewerage Company with the government partnership and World Bank financial support. The objective of this study is to complete the first phase of a two-phase study to determine the impact of using an urban sewerage system on acute Diarrhoea in children under five years of age in Bandar-Anzali in the Guilan province.
Materails and methods: The study is a concurrent control before and after field trial which is carried out in two stages: before (phase I) and after (phase II). Sampling for phase I was performed in the middle month of each season, November and February 2009 and May and August 2010. The incidence of acute Diarrhoea was measured with the participation of 2400 mothers of children under 5 years old in the city of Bandar-Anzali in two groups: the intervention group (inside the sewerage system project perimeters) and the control group (outside the project perimeters). Data were collected by local female general practitioners and medical students in each city, under supervision of the community medicine department and by door-to-door interview with mothers. Data were analyzed using the SPSS 11.5 software package and the Pearson Chi-Square was used to compare qualitative variables between groups, and the t-test and One-Way ANOVA was used to compare quantitative variables.
Results: The annual incidence of acute diarrhoea in children under five years old was 11.9%. The seasonal pattern of acut diarrheoa incidence was 12.6% in May, 13.3 in August, 11.5% in November, and 10.3% in February respectively. The highest incidence of acute diarrhoea was seen in children from 2 to 5 years of age.
Conclusion: The study showed the incidence of acute diarrhoea on children under five years old in Bandar-Anzali city is moderate and it follows a seasonal pattern. The highest rate was seen in summer and the lowest rate in winter. It is expected to decrease with the initiation of the sewerage system program.

