This paper investigates design factors and the interaction that occurs between the different elements of the design process. Here, at the beginning, the gap created between the level and the extent of capabilities formed in university environments was compared with capabilities expected from graduated people in their professional environments and  In continuation, ignoring some parts of the related factors and variables is considered one element of this fault. The relationship between different issues of the design, the properties of the final product, the context in which it sits, the design process and its various sources of inspiration, all contribute to a complex structure that becomes an inevitable subject of carful study. Undoubtedly the management of design process helps designers to perform more systematically. In this context, indicators as tools for assessing the design process and criteria as tools for the evaluation of the design products are factors to allow designers (and others) to manage and control the quality of design. The methods of the evaluation process analysis witch consider the architectural problem space as a network and matrix are some tools that help for analyzing multiple and complex criteria and sub criteria. The method of research in this paper is based on a "logical reasoning" which utilized guidelines of a research design entitled "grounded Theory " and "Model Simulation ". At the end of this manuscript, a new model was expressed which discusses a relationship based on the "fuzzy logic environment" among various elements of the" architectural problem space".  This environment contains elements such as the principles, range and media of a design and the specifications and factors categorized based on the subject. The objective of this work is to find a response for this fundamental question that how it is possible to improve the capabilities of graduated peoples in their professional environment by identification, analysis and suitable assessment of design factors.  
