Introduction: Leadership is one of the important responsibilities of leaders, science and art of influencing others is to access goals. Leadership style or management determines atmosphere, culture and rules which control organization. Heads of departments can increase job satisfaction, employees' organizational obligation and efficiency by using leadership styles. 
Objective: This study aimed to determine the relationship between leadership styles of heads of educational groups and faculties’ job Satisfaction of Guilan University of Medical Sciences.
Methods: In this cross-sectional, descriptive study, 150 full-time faculty members of Guilan University of Medical Sciences were selected. Data were collected through questionnaire. The questionnaire included three parts covering personal characteristics, the leadership styles of heads of educational groups and job satisfaction of university faculty members. Data were analyzed using frequency distribution, correlation matrices and two- way ANOVA. 
Results: Data analysis indicated that job satisfaction of faculty members was moderate (Mean and SD 219.46±27.41 from total job satisfaction and 118.14±17.77 from total leadership styles) and also showed a direct and significant relationship between leadership styles of heads of educational groups and job satisfaction of faculty members(P < 0/01). Also there was a strong relationship between structured style (task-oriented) of educational group managers and faculty members’ job satisfaction (P < 0/01). Based on results, mean of leadership style in men was 115.20±18.27 and in women 120.78±18.27 and there was no significant difference between gender and leadership style (P= 0.055). There was a significant relationship between gender and job satisfaction (men 214.71±24.94and women 223.66±28.98) (P=0.048).
Conclusion: In attention to significant and positive relationship between leadership styles of heads of educational groups and job satisfaction of faculty members, for dynamic management system in groups, it is required to make decisions at different levels based on mission, goals and active participation of faculty members to increase their job satisfaction and to arise areas for change, invention, innovation and creativity.
