Introduction: Nowadays the most important problem of our educational system is educational subsidence phenomenon. Therefore knowing factors which improves education and prevents    is of special importance. Self-concept is among factors studied a lot. Many studies indicate a direct relationship between self-concept and educational subsidence but some experts doubt the direct relationship of these two concepts. 
Objective: This study aimed to determine the correlation between self-concept and academic achievement of students.
 Methods: This is a cross-sectional descriptive – analytical study. Study population consisted of 238 BS level students East Gilan Faculty who spent at least two consecutive semesters in this college. The criteria of academic achievement included students' grade point average of last two semesters and no history of probation. Data gathering instrument included personal-educational characteristic questionnaire and Cooper smith 58 -item test on self concept. Data were analyzed using descriptive and inferential statistical methods such as one way variance analysis and nonparametric tests (Spearman, Mann-Whitney, Kuriscal Wallis and Tukey tests).
Results: The majorities (85.7 %) were educationally successful and (92.8%) had high self-concept.  Average grade mean and deviation of individuals with low self-concept was 16. / 16+1/7 and indviduals with high self-concept was16.51+1.2. Based on Spearman correlation coefficients a significant correlation was observed between self-concept and academic achievement of students (p = 0.061). Predictive variables of academic achievement included satisfaction with growth environment and family training of students.
Conclusions: Although individuals with high self-concept had higher average grade point but this relationship was not significant. Therefore due to cultural differences and fast changes of factors during time no one factor can be stated as the overall rule but a positive significant relationship between educational success and students' satisfaction with growth environment and their family training may be a good indicator for student advisors to pay attention to family factor in time of problemsluding educational subsidence.
