The present paper is the second part of a systematic study of the influence of W and Ir loading on the activity of Ir/WO3/ZrO2–SiO2 catalysts for the ring-opening reaction of naphthenic molecules using methylcyclohexane (MCH) as a model compound. A series of Si-stabilized tungstated zirconias, WOx/ZrO2–SiO2, containing up to 3.5 atom W/nm2, was prepared. Ir-based catalysts containing up to 1.2 wt% were obtained by impregnation of these solids. Characterization of the metal dispersion and catalyst acidity was described in a previous article. The objective of the present study was to determine the best metal/acid balance for optimal performance of Ir/WOx/ZrO2–SiO2 catalysts in the ring-opening reaction of MCH. Monofunctional (acid WOx/ZrO2–SiO2 or metal Ir/ZrO2–SiO2) and bifunctional (Ir/WO3/ZrO2–SiO2) catalysts were examined. Based on the analysis of the yields and products distributions, a reaction network was proposed, and kinetic data (e.g., activation energies, initial rates) were calculated. Correlations between characterization results obtained earlier (e.g., acidity, dispersion) and catalytic performance are also reported. The monofunctional acid catalysts WOx/ZrO2–SiO2 showed a low selectivity for ring opening. The ring-contraction activity developed for W surface density above a threshold value of 1 atom W/nm2. This was attributed to the appearance and the development of a relatively strong Brönsted acidity monitored by infrared measurements. MCH ring contraction and C5 naphthene ring opening occur according to a classic acid mechanism. For low conversions, the monofunctional metal catalysts Ir/ZrO2–SiO2 exhibited significant selectivity for ring opening that decreased with increasing conversion. Because of the lack of ring-contraction products, the observed activity was attributed to the direct ring opening of the MCH. Ring opening and cracking occur according to a dicarbene mechanism. The study of MCH conversion on Ir/WOx/ZrO2–SiO2 catalysts indicated that MCH ring contraction to alkylcyclopentanes occurs before ring opening. The best yields for ring opening were obtained with the 1.2% Ir/WOx/ZrO2 (1.5 atom of W/nm2). Further increases in W surface density led to a decrease in the indirect ring-opening yield, attributed to a decrease in Ir dispersion. For bifunctional metal/acid catalysts, analysis of the mechanism is less straightforward. The activation energy for C6 ring contraction and indirect C6 ring opening is a function of the metal/acid ratio. For high ratios, indirect ring opening occurs essentially over metallic sites. A decrease in the metal/acid ratio enhances the contribution of acid mechanism.
