The main objective of this research was to evaluate creativity components in the central library websites of the universities dominated by the Ministry of Science, Research, and Technology (MSRT) of Iran to improve those components in university libraries. Research population included 35 library websites of the mentioned universities which had a separate homepage for their central libraries. Data were gathered by the use of a checklist that was made by researcher based on literature. This checklist contained the dimensions of creativity in university libraries websites. It encompassed 30 creativity components which were categorized under 4 main dimensions: originality (novelty, uniqueness), form (design and aesthetics), function (interest, usefulness, usability, and personalization), and source (motivation, and creative skills). To test the content validity of the checklist, it was sent to 9 specialists to gather their views. The results indicated that 3 library websites (Zanjan University, University of Mazandaran, and Tehran University), were gained top ranks. In the other hand, the central library websites of 3 others (Babol Noushirvani University of Technology, Tarbiat Moallem Azarbayejan University, and Birjand University) were at the end of ranking scale of creativity. Only 9 out of 35 investigated websites (including Zanjan University, University of Mazandaran, Tehran University, Imam Khomeini International University, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Isfahan University of Technology, University of Sistan & Baluchestan, University of Tabriz and Arak university) were in desired conditions of creativity components. Findings showed that, out of 4 creativity dimensions (originality, form, function, and source) evaluated, 65.71% of components of source dimension (the most) and 40% of  function dimension one (the least) were available in the 35 central library websites of investigated universities.  The results also revealed that there was a significant correlation between the ranking of the central library websites of MSRT and the ranking of the same universities websites regarding the receiving links (at ?=0.05).
