Objective: Some previous studies have reported that ADHD is often comorbid with anxiety disorders. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of reboxetine in treating outpatient children and adolescents with ADHD and comorbid anxiety disorders.
Method: In this open-label study, 25 outpatient children and adolescents, aged 6-16 years were selected by convenient sampling and underwent treatment with 4mg reboxetine for four weeks. Data were collected at baseline, two weeks and four weeks after the start of the medication using Conners' Parent Questionnaire, Hamilton's Rating Scale for Anxiety, Clinical Global Assessment Scale, Clinical Global Impression-Severity Scale and Side Effects Form. Data were analyzed using repeated measure, analyses of variance (ANOVA), Tukey post hoc test and paired t-test.
Results: There were significant reduction in the total score of ADHD (F = 31.441; P  < 0.001) at the end of the treatment compared to baseline (Table1). The differences between T0 and T2 in the subscales of attention deficit, hyperactivity and confrontation (F = 20.691; P  < 0.001, F = 28.810; P  < 0.001, and F = 17.463; P  < 0.001, respectively) were also significant. Findings also indicated significant differences between T0 and T1 (P < 0.01) and T1 and T2 (P < 0.01) in all of the subscales except for confrontation. A significant improvement was observed in the severity of ADHD and anxiety disorders during different courses of the treatment (p < 0.001). No significant changes were observed in systolic and diastolic blood pressure and pulse and weight of the patients during the study. The most common complications were headache and anorexia.
Conclusions: The short-term treatment with reboxetine was effective in improving ADHD with comorbid anxiety disorders. Therefore, reboxetine could be used as a treatment option for ADHD in those children who experience comorbid anxiety disorders or in those who are non-responsive or intolerant to methylphenidate.

