Introduction & Objective: Mankind in his life is exposed to environmental factors produced by his scientific activities more and more. One of these factors is electromagnetic field (EMF). EMF exerts its lethal effect primarily by producing pores in the cytoplasm membrane. On the other hand, polymyxin causes disorganization of the cell membrane. The aim of this work was the study of the combined effect of EMF and polymyxin on the growth of pseudomonas aeruginosa and Bacillus cereus.
Materials & Methods:. This experimental work was performed in Biotechnology Laboratory, Biology Department, College of Sciences, Shiraz University in 1382. In the present work, at first the effect of polymyxin on the growth of a Gram positive (B. cereus) and a Gram negative (P. aeruginosa) bacteria in 37°0 was investigated by Bauer-Kirby method. B. cereus was resistant and P. aeruginosa was susceptible to polymyxin. Bacteria were cultured on lactose broth and M9 buffer and they were exposed to EMF . Next the suspensions of bacteria were swabbed over the surface of Hinton agar plates and paper disks containing antibiotic agent were placed onto the inoculated surface. Then, the combined effect of EMFs and polymyxin on the growth of these two bacteria was studies. SPSS software and variance analysis were applied to analyze the results.
Results:The results showed that combined treatment of EMF of 12 G had no significant effect either on the resistance pattern of B. cereus or susceptibility pattern of P. aeruginosa. Although the combined treatment of EMF of 21 G and polymyxin had no significant effect on the susceptibility pattern of P. aeruginosa it affected the resistance pattern of B. cereus. Thus, by using this field from zero to two hours it had no effect on the resistance of B. cereus to polymyxin and by applying it for three hours or more, the intermediate response was observed,
Conclusion: Probably, by using the EMF and some chemicals simultaneously, the undesired growth of bacteria (like biofilms) can be controlled.
