BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The recognition of medical students problems related to their future job and resolve them is the duty of higher education system. This study was performed to evaluate the medical students' attitude toward their future job in second-stager and intern stages in Baba] University of medical sciences.
METHODS: This descriptive, analytical and cross-sectional study was performed on 200 medical students (interns and stagers) in Babel University of medical sciences in 2003. Data was collected by questionnaires consist of two parts. First part related to general information and the second one was related to 20 questions about evaluation of their attitude toward future job. The data were analyzed by Chi- square test to determine the association between variables under study.
FINDINGS: Most of the students chose medical field with interest and motivation (34.5% very much, 39.5% much) and the aim of majority of them was to acquire a high social position in community (51.5%). While the attitude of majority of students toward their major changed as compared with the year of their entrance to university (38.5% much, 21% very much), These changes of attitude were almost toward the negative value (57.5%). The majority of the students (44% much, 17% very much) were satisfied with their major and believed that economical and social problems have little effect on their interest in studying and serving people in community (42.5% little, 19% very little). Most of the students complained about the lack of job security (79%) and the majority of them believed that it gives them spiritual satisfaction (50.5% much, 22% very much), but they won't reach to desired social situation (56%). The majority of students were interested in getting MD degree (50% very much, 38.5% much) and believed continuing education is the key to successful (50% very much, 35% much). In spite of these problems, most of them (50.5% much, 20.5% very much) thought that belief in God is effective. Also, there was not a statistically significant difference between the variables of sex, age, marital status and educational degree with students' attitude toward job opportunity in future.
CONCLUSION: Regarding the changing in attitude of medical students is negative toward the future job, the short or long-term programming should be accomplished for increasing of efficiency and utilities. Therefore, modifying the educational and administrative structure of universities, providing welfare and economic facilities, reducing duration of education, providing opportunity for general practitioners to continue education and the employment of young doctors are the steps that should be taken.
