The purpose of this study was to compare the effectiveness of two intervention methods: Achievement motivation training vs. self-esteem improvement practice, on the progressive development of self-system among subjects with concrete and abstract inteligence levels. In so doing, the pre-test and post-test design was used. 120 female adolescents were included in the study; 60 with concrete and 60 with abstract intelligence, who were randomly selected and saaigned in three subgroups in each level, two experimental and one control (each included 20 subjects). To find the subjects' intelligence level, the Piaget's operational tests were conducted. The self-development level has been examined by Self-Understanding Interview, conducted twice, before and after carrying out the interventions. In each intelligence level, one of the experimental groups received the achievement motivation training, and the other received the self-esteem improvement practice, while the control groups were treated as usual. The results revealed that: With respect to self-as-object, both of the intervention methods in both inteligence levels, had significant effect on the progressive development of objective self; meanwhile the self-esteem practice was more effective than the other method. With respect to self-as-subject components, in both intelligence levels, the intervention methods had no significant effect on "agency" component, while they had significant effect on the progressive development of "continuity". The intervention methods had significant effect on "distinctness", only in the abstract intelligence level. Therefore, the effectiveness of mentioned interventions on the progressive development of objective self is supported, regardless of intelligence level; while the effectiveness of them on progressive development of subjective self components is not pervassive, and depends on intelligence level. This study suggests the use of appropriate intervention programs for prevention and intervention in adolescence period.
