The main objective of this paper is to develop a generalized finite element formulation of stress integration method for non-quadratic yield functions and potentials with mixed nonlinear hardening under non-associated flow rule. Different approaches to analyze the anisotropic behavior of sheet materials were compared in this paper. The first model was based on a non-associated formulation with both quadratic yield and potential functions in the form of . The anisotropy coefficients in the yield and potential functions were determined from the yield stresses and r-values in different orientations, respectively. The second model was an associated non-quadratic model (Yld2000-2d) proposed by . The anisotropy in this model was introduced by using two linear transformations on the stress tensor. The third model was a non-quadratic non-associated model in which the yield function was defined based on Yld91 proposed by and the potential function was defined based on Yld89 proposed by . Anisotropy coefficients of Yld91 and Yld89 functions were determined by yield stresses and r-values, respectively. The formulations for the three models were derived for the mixed isotropic-nonlinear kinematic hardening framework that is more suitable for cyclic loadings (though it can easily be derived for pure isotropic hardening). After developing a general non-associated mixed hardening numerical stress integration algorithm based on backward-Euler method, all models were implemented in the commercial finite element code ABAQUS as user-defined material subroutines. Different sheet metal forming simulations were performed with these anisotropic models: cup drawing processes and springback of channel draw processes with different drawbead penetrations. The earing profiles and the springback results obtained from simulations with the three different models were compared with experimental results, while the computational costs were compared. Also, in-plane cyclic tension–compression tests for the extraction of the mixed hardening parameters used in the springback simulations were performed for two sheet materials.
