
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Candida vaginitis is a common problem in women. Due to similarity of symptoms of vaginal candidiasis and other vaginal infection and not using the culture of vaginal samples by physician to diagnose, led to inappropriate administration of anti-fungal drugs. This study was designed to determine the association between clinical diagnosis and candida culture. 
METHODS: This cross sectional study was performed on 400 women with symptoms of vaginal candidiasis who referred to gynecologic clinic of teaching hospitals in Babol, Iran. Vaginal discharge sample was taken from 102 women with diagnosed vaginal candidiasis after examination and completing the questionnaires. Samples were carried to lab and cultured in saburo dexterous agar. Wet and dry smears were prepared. The grown candida colonies were cultured in chromagar to recognize the species of candida. The results were compared with clinical findings and its relationship with diabetes mellitus, drug use and clinical symptoms was assessed.
FINDINGS: Average age of patients was 33.36±8.29 that among them just 41(40.2%) of samples have a positive culture for candida and in positive items 50 (81.08%) were candida albicans and the others were non-albicans. Also, the accuracy of wet smear (91.17%) and gram stain (94.11%) were detected. There was no significant relationship between positive culture and diabetes mellitus, usage of contraception methods, corticosteroids and using of antibiotics in last 30 days. Among clinical symptoms, dyspareunia and among clinical signs, vulvar erythema and edema and sign of excoriation have significant difference in two groups of positive culture and negative culture (p < 0.05). The most accuracy of symptoms for dysparonia (66.66%) and signs for vulvar erythema (64.7%) were detected.
CONCLUSION: Clinical diagnosis is not reliable method to diagnose vaginal candidiasis. Also in symptomatic patients with obvious dysparonia and vulvar erythema, microscopic examination can verify the disease. 

KEY WORDS: Candida vaginitis, Clinical symptoms, Chrom agar, Candida albicans, Non albicans.

