Naming the fourth decade of the Islamic Revolution by its leadership is a planning jump in the state planning system. Typically, development plans are designed and implemented based on the discourse of that period. The discourse of the first decade of the Islamic Revolution, which contains valuable concepts rooted from the Islamic revolution, required value management that we witnessed its substantiated context in the holy defense. The discourse of the second decade of the Islamic Revolution was constructive discourse that summed up all its aims on the development of the economy. The peak of the second decade’s discourse was manifested in the third development plan. The discourse of the third decade of the Islamic revolution was the discourse of freedom that summarized all its aims in political development. The peak of the discourse of the third decade was manifested in the fourth development plan. In the fourth decade of the Islamic Revolution, it is expected that the discourse of progress and justice would be dominant discourse of the society and the main orientation of the fifth and sixth development plans; and look for the discourse expansion and objective realization of this idea.
In this paper we attempt to describe the circumstances ruling on the cultural field, particularly on the press, in the verge of the fourth decade, and find appropriate guidelines for this realm in order to achieve progress based on justice. In the hierarchy of strategic policy making for progress and justice development program, the position of strategic requirements are placed in correspondence with the main requirements of different areas of the system, and at a lower level of the general policies and upper than operating procedures. In fact, the strategic requirements show the main vision and framework of the relevant realm for planners of progress and justice. The method of compiling strategic requirements is based on major issues and challenges in the field of culture and press that will be provided in the form of political predicates. In this study methodology is based on an upstream and documentary research and also, finally, referring the strategic requirements of each field to the experts to be approved or rejected.

