Introduction: Regarding the importance of uterus in implantation of the embryo and increased fertility, having access to objective methods for assessing uterine health status could play an important role in enhancing the success rates of treatment modalities. This study was performed to evaluate and determine the relationship between the personal and uterine temperaments in infertile women.
Methods: This descriptive-analytical cross-sectional study was conducted in the traditional medicine clinic of Imam Khomeini hospital in collaboration with the infertility clinic of Vali-e-Asr hospital of Tehran, Iran. First, the personal and uterine temperament questionnaires of the study group were completed and the personal and uterine temperaments of 54 infertile women were designated. The frequency of uterine dystemperaments and the relationship between individual and uterine temperaments were determined. Data were analyzed using SPSS software version 17 and the frequency of quantitative variables was expressed using mean and standard deviations and frequencies of qualitative variables were shown by numbers and percentages. To evaluate the correlation between the uterine and the whole body temperaments, Spearman's correlation coefficient test was used. P value less than 0.05 was considered significant.
Results: The most prevalent uterine dystemperaments in infertile women were the cold and the wet dystemperaments in simple dystemperaments and the cold and wet dystemperament in compound ones. Also a significant relationship was seen between the personal and uterine temperaments (p=0.04).
Conclusion: Due to the prevalence of cold temperament in infertile women and cold and wet dystemperament in their uterus, it can be considered that the presence of these symptoms in women can predict the infertility. Also by application of preventive measures and treatment of this dystemperament according to traditional medical texts, the infertile couple can be treated with a new approach.

