
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Successful implementation of FP program and rural insurance requires continuous collaboration among the intersectoral and intrasectoral organizations. FPs’ satisfaction from related institutions can lead to more motivation, longer activity and better services in the organization. This study was performed to evaluate the level of FPs’ satisfaction in Northern provinces of Iran. 
METHODS: This cross-sectional study was performed in winter 2013. Totally 139 health centers from 552 which implement the family physician program and rural insurance coverage in Mazandaran, Golestan and Guilan provinces were randomly selected. In each center all of available FPs included. A researcher-made questionnaire was used for data gathering. In this questionnaire, personal characteristics with 10 open and closed questions, satisfaction from human and physical resources available at the first level, the function of health center of the city, the function of specialists at the second level, the performance of underlying population of intersectional organizations were asked through 34 questions with Likert scales. Validity and reliability of the questionnaire were approved. 
FINDINGS: Mean of the level of 188 FPs’ satisfaction about health team, equipment and facilities in the centers (of 5 score) was 3±0.6, underlying population was 2.8±0.8, intersectoral collaboration was 2.8±1, the function of district health center was 2.7±0.9, the function of specialists was 2.1±0.9. The level of FPs’ satisfaction from the specialists of the functional second level showed a significant difference in the Northern provinces of Iran (p=0.001). There was not a significant relationship between age, underlying population, recorded services, the number of replacements and the level of FP's satisfaction. 
CONCLUSION: The results of this study showed that the level of FPs’ satisfaction was moderate; therefore, interventional program at different levels should be planned and implemented to protect and promote it.   

KEY WORDS: Satisfaction, Family physician, Health care center, Rural insurance.

