Introduction: Diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease and it is an increasing health problem worldwide. Due to increasing prevalence of diabetes and its related complications and costs, self management has become very important.
Objective: This study was designed to determine effective factors on self management in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus(IDDM) patients who referred to health therapeutic center in Rasht.
Materials and methods: This research is a cross - sectional study. The sample consisted of 92 IDDM patients, who were selected by random sampling method . Data collection instrument was a four part questionnaire which covered demographic data, knowledge, perceived control and health belief of diabetes. In this research, self-management index included glycosylated hemoglobin and number of referrals to the center. In order to analyze the data, descriptive(mean,standard deviation) and inferential ( t-test , one way ANOVA, Tukey test, mane whitney---u , kruskal wallis , ... ) were used .
Results: Findings showed no statistically significant relationship between demographic data such as sex, age, marital status, education, employment status, health insurance status, duration of diabetes, place of living, presence of diabetic family members and sources of income with knowledge, locus of control and health belief. Also there was no significant relationship between complication with knowledge and health belief, but a significant relationship was indicated between complication with locus of control (p<0.004). The results indicated that the majority of the samples had poor knowledge (%59.8), unsatisfactory health belief (%71.7) and pour perceived control (%62). There was no significant relationship between knowledge , health belief and locus of control with glycosylated hemoglobin , number of referrals and self management .
Conclusion: Identfication of effective factors on self management in educational & tharaputic planning for patients with D.M and Education of helth care workers and nursing education is important.
