Objective: In order to evaluate occupational exposure to Nickel compounds in electroplating, 35 male workers in a big electroplating workshop in west of Tehran were examined. Four of them excluded due to exceed of their urinary creatinine defined values.
Methods: Stationary and personal air, urinary samples were collected and evaluated by standard methods (D4185-90 ASTM standard with the flame atomic absorption for air and the flameless atomic absorption for urine samples).
Results: The results related to air pollution revealed that the mean of pollutant (Ni) amounts in air of all parts of the workshop was less than threshold limit value reported by ACGIH (100µg/m^3). The mean of urinary Ni concentration in the electroplater (17 cases) and polisher (7 cases) exceeded from the standard limit for unexposed personnel (4.5µg/lit) with significantly differences (77.45 and 64.75µg/lit respectively).
Meanwhile, the above values had not difference significantly with Finland Biological Action Level (BAL=76µg/lit). These data, of course, when corrected by creatinine, it also exceeded the control group exceeded from
the control group's urinary samples (50.5µg/gcrea versus 21 and 24µgcrea). The values related to urinary in smokers and nonsmokers had not difference
	significantly (43 and 46µg/gcrea respectively). Age or occupational history had
	not effect on urinary Ni concentrations (low correlation).
	in electroplaters were observed relatively high correlation between personal air and urinary Ni concentration (R=0.5053, P<0.001) and low relationship in polishers. On the other hand, the level of the urinary Ni concentration determined in all of the subjects was more than that one expected in the electroplating workshop. Discussion: Altogether and taking into consideration the low concentrations of pollutant (Ni) in stationary and personal air in this electroplating workshop regarding threshold limit value recommended (100miug/m^3), there is still the risk of exposure to pollutant in this factory which the data of Ni concentration in urine of the workers definitely reflect this matter, This study concluded that the workers in this factory could exposure to the Ni compounds by other than air, including by skin and by digestion it which would be appeared in their urine.
