Introduction: The analysis of cytokine production is a valuable component of studies of immune response to stimulation such as pathogens, vaccines, and other immunological challenges. The animal findings Show that brucella infection induces cell-mediated responses. Some cytokines have an Important role in resistance to brucella infection.
Objective: This Study is don't to Poesent a orecise an useful unseparated whole blood of healthy normal and patients with acute and chronic brucellosis as the source of cells evaluation of interferon gamma (IFN-y) and interleukin-13 expression.
Materials and Methods: Diluted whole blood samples of 27 patients with acute (14) and chronic brucellosis (n13), and sex and age-matched healthy volunteers (n=22) With Meanage of 35-33+ 21 were cultured in the presence of either mitogen; heat inactivated bacteria or medium alone. Intracellular IL-13 and IFN-y were measured by specific sandwich ELISA and flow Cytometry was detected by the number of cytokine-producing
CD3+ cells.
Results: Findings indicated that extrandintracellular specific IFN-Gama in creased Cansiderably (P<0.001) in cute brucelles patients. not only IFN-Gama production but also the number of IFN-Gama- producing CD3 cells were significantly decreased in response to antigen in chronic group of patients. There was a reverse correlation between the number of IFN-Gama-producing and IL-I3-producing CD3 cells only in acute group which shows polarization of immune responses to Th I in them.
Conclusion: Although the percentage of CD3 IL-13-producing cells was dramatically high in the chronic group of patients, no correlation was found between the number of IFN-Gama-producing and IL-13-producing CD3 cells. In conclusion, the correlation of Th2 cytokines production and progression of chronic human brucellosis was not demonstrated. Nevertheless, diminished production of Thl cytokines production in chronic group may suggest T cells unresponsiveness to Brucella antigen which helps prolongation of brucellosis in chronic patients.
