Among the multi-dimensions of sustainable development, social sustainability, as one of the dimensions of sustainable development, is in line with the qualitative aspects of human life. It is based on concepts such as prediction, equity driven, participation, empowerment, equal access, promotion of cultural identity and emphasis on institutional stability. Theoretical framework of sustainability shows that any planning based on the sustainable development requires a comprehensive and holistic picture all aspects of development in the study area. The aim of this study was to assess and prioritize social sustainability within the villages of North Khaveh district from central division of Delfan city that is located in Lorestan province .The research method of this study is descriptive-analytic. Multi-criteria decision based on VIKOR model and the analytical methods were used for ranking 10 villages. Finally, in this model, the value of Q represents the final ranking of each village from total of 11 indicators. In order to achieve the purpose of research multi-criteria decision-making methods, Analytic models (VIKOR and AHP) use to rank 10 villages and 150 households in the Khavh village located in the north central of Delfan city. Subjective indicators and models used to explain the facts of the sample villages society. Subsequently, the results of the research show that the villages such as Kafraj, Sarab Ghazanfar and Iranshahi have the highest social stability and villages such as Sorkhanjub, Azizabad and Nor Mohammad Zamane have lowest social stability among the sample rural areas. Also, obtained Q mean was equal to 0.520 in 10 studied villages, indicating that the overall social stability in North Khavh rural is lower than average. This study proposed 11 objective indicators for social sustainability such as social participation, social interaction, social solidarity, social responsibility, job satisfaction, accessibility to services (quantity and quality), social trust, luck sense, future expectancy to the, etc. These are pragmatic and practical factors that should be placed at the center of planning and community development. It should be mentioned that some essential arrangements were done for gathering data and measuring indicators via questionnaire in 10 rural with 150 rural households. Therefore, in order to improve social sustainability in North Khaveh rural procedures such as equitable distribution of resources, adequate social services for all individuals particularly in education and health sectors, omitting social and gender discrimination, Promoting political responsibility and community Involvement should be placed at the center of planning and community development.
