Due to the fact that Iran is generally prone to natural disasters, issues pertaining to quality and insufficient formidability of rural construction have made renovation and better construction of rural housing as the fixed part of governments’ plans in rural areas in the past two decades. So, based on Rural Housing Improvement plan, it was decided that during 2 five-year development plan (10 years) by allocation of low interest loans and long-term repayment, 2 million housing units to be built in the country and replaced with non-resistant existing units. This study aims to investigate the performance of government on rural housing based on the 4th and 5th Development Plans, using balanced scorecard (BSC) model (i.e. residents and clients, internal processes, growth and learning, and social and financial responsibility). The methodology of the present study is applicable in terms of objective and also descriptive- measurable from view point of  the method. Questionnaires and quantitative data of the Housing Foundation of Islamic Revolution in Isfahan province were used to collect data. Statistical community of this study includes all villages in the province for investigation of some indices and for studying certain other indices, only some villages were selected by the researcher. In order to determine the statistical size of the study, Krejcie and Morgan Table and random sampling were used. In better words, first the statistical population is categorized by choosing a village in each province and then the questionnaires are randomly distributed among the related groups within the statistical population. Required sample size was estimated to be 40, 380, 186, and 25 for the rural governors, villagers, building technical supervisors, and staff respectively. Content validity was used to determine validity of indices and questionnaires. Reliability coefficient (Cronbach's alpha) in the questionnaires was higher than 0.7 in all four groups. Findings of the study indicate that in 28 out of 40 indices, the goals of the Development Plan were met with a degree of higher than 70 percent. In addition, the government has had the highest achievement of goals in domestic processes with 88.49 percent and the lowest achievement in financial affairs with 66.19 percent. Therefore, in order to enhance the performance and to achieve the defined goals, it is recommended to build up on the culture, familiarize rural dwellers with plans of the renovation project, increase financial facilities, train local craftsmen and contractors, improve administrative processes and having control on resistant rural housing.
