Background&Objective: Anxiety and assertiveness lead to disorder achivement, destroying intelligence and learning abilities, decreasing thinking attention and declining talents. It causes damages to individuals, family and community. Several therapeutic procedures suggested such as drug therapy for solving anxiety and increasing assertiveness, one of none drug therapy (behavioral therapy) is assertive training. In respect of contradiction of any results in the field of assertive training, we decided to design and carry out the present study.
Materials&Methods: In study of field trial, first, we distributed overt and latent spilberger's anxiety questioner and Gambrilrichy's assertive questioner among all nursing student's of nursing and midwifery department of Nassibeh in Sari by sensus, and a number of sixty students with anxiety ranging were from moderate to sever with low assertiveness were selected, after matching than on the bases of sex, degree of interesting, course of study the degree, anxiety and assertiveness, they are divided in case and control group equally. For case group, assertive training performed during six weeks, once in a week for half an hour and no training is considered for control group. Degree of anxiety and assertiveness of nursing students in control and case group assessed and compaired by the use of couple t-test.
Results: Couple t-test's presented that decrease of overt and latent anxiety of nursing students in case group pre and post assertiveness training was significant. (Latent anxiety, t=7.68, overt anxiety, t=4.97, P<0.05) on the bases couple t-test, increase of assertiveness degree in control group in pre and post assertive training was significant compairing to control group (t=-9.93, P<0.05).
Conclusion: Regarding that increasing anxiety and decreasing assertiveness has undesirable effect on job performance, individual achievement and ability and with respecting to usefulness of assertive training procedure in decreasing anxiety and increasing assertiveness, it is suggested that assertive training is used as an on therapeutic procedure for decreasing anxiety and increasing assertiveness for nursing students.
