Xishuangbanna is located at the northern edge of the distribution of tropical forests in Southeast Asia, and it has a very high frequency of radiation fog, especially during the dry season (November-April). In this study, rainwater, throughfall, intercepted fog water (fog drip) by forest canopy, and stream water were collected in January 2002 and December 2003 for stable isotopic analysis at a tropical seasonal rain forest site in Xishuangbanna, Southwest China. The objective of the study is to estimate the evaporation rate from the forest floor. The stable hydrogen (δD) and oxygen isotope composition (δ18O) of rainwater, throughfall, fog drip, and stream water was determined using an isotope ratio mass spectrometer. Stream water during the non-storm runoff period was considered to reflect the effect of evaporation from the forest floor. The evaporation rates from the forest floor were estimated using isotope composition values in stream water and the total throughfall was estimated using the Rayleigh distillation equation under equilibrium conditions. The results indicated that the annual weighted means of δD and δ18O in fog drip were consistently more enriched than those of rainwater and stream water, and the fog drip was thought to contain water that had evaporated and recycled. The weighted means of δD and δ18O in stream water during the non-storm runoff period were 5.69% and 0.39% more enriched than those of the total throughfall (rain throughfall + fog drip) in 2002, while in 2003 these were 5.05% and 0.28%, respectively. Evapotranspiration in the humid year 2002 and the dry year 2003, computed from the water balance, was 1186 mm and 987 mm, respectively, which was quite low when compared with the values reported in some humid tropical forests. Consequently, the evaporation rate from the forest floor was 5.1% of the evapotranspiration in 2002, and 3.1% in 2003. The lower evaporation rate was thought to be mainly a result of the influence of the high frequency of heavy radiation fog on the rain forest during the night in the dry season (November-April).
