Methane is one of the principal greenhouse gases. Irrigated rice paddies are recognized as contributing to atmospheric methane concentration. Methane emissions from rice paddies are among the most uncertain estimates in rice-growing countries. Efforts have been made over the last decade to estimate CH4 emissions from Chinese rice paddies via the model method. However, these estimates are very vague due to different models and upscaling methods. A reduction in these uncertainties may be achieved by coupling field-scale models with regional databases. The objective of this article is to develop a methodology of coupling a CH4 emission model with regional databases by which CH4 emissions from Chinese rice paddies can then be estimated. CH4MOD, a model for simulating CH4 emissions from rice paddies with minimal input by using commonly available parameters, is of great potential in terms of upscaling as it has provided a realistic estimate of the observed results from various soils, climates and agricultural practices. By linking spatial databases to CH4MOD, CH4 emissions from Chinese rice paddies in the 2000 rice-growing season were simulated on a day-by-day basis. The spatial databases were created by GIS with a spatial resolution of 10km×10km, including soil sand percentage, amounts of crop straw and roots from the previous season and farm manure, the water management pattern, dates of rice transplanting and harvesting, acreage of rice planted, rice grain yield and daily air temperature. ARCGIS software was used to meet all GIS needs, including data access, projection definition, overlaying of different vector layers, creation of grids (a raster format of ARCGIS software) by converting vector data, and the data conversion between grids and ASCII formats. Methane emissions from rice paddies in mainland China in the 2000 rice-growing season were estimated to be 6.02 Tg (1 Tg = 109 kg). Of the total, approximately 49% (2.93Tg) is emitted during the single rice-growing season, and 27% (1.63Tg) and 24% (1.46Tg) are from the early and late rice-growing seasons respectively. It was concluded that regional CH4 emissions from rice paddies could be estimated by coupling CH4MOD with regional databases with a high spatial resolution. A further effort should be made to improve the quality of the spatial databases, especially in terms of the amount of added organic matter and the water regime. It is also necessary to evaluate the uncertainties of the present estimates in order to improve the overall accuracy.
