Pollution from the oil shale dump in Maoming, Guangdong Province, China, was a major social problem due to the great amount of environmental damage it caused. Therefore, a great deal of attention needed to be paid for the ecological restoration and reconstruction. The objective of this study was to investigate the species composition of soil fauna and its diversity in oil shale dumps after the application of different ecological restoration schemes in order to understand the impact they had on ecological restoration. Three plots were selected on an oil shale dump near the city of Maoming. The “north plot” was a newly-planted young forest mixed with various tree species, while the “south plot” was a 20-year-old Acacia auriculaeformis forest, and the “control plot” was a 20-year-old naturally-recovering grassland. Soil animals, mainly including macro-meso groups, were collected by hand-sorting and Tullgren funnel extraction. They were then identified to family or genus level with only a small portion to order (e.g. Chllopoda) or species (e.g. Isopoda) level. The specimens obtained in the present study was 11164 individuals, belonging to 27 orders and 110 families or genera. The Shannon index (H′), DGs (based on species) and DGg (based on groups) were used to analyze the diversity of soil animals between different plots. The major results were as follows: A total of 33 families or genera belonging to nine orders were found in the “north plot”. The main group was Caritermes, accounting for 63.4% of the total, followed by Tetramorium with 21.3%. Hymenoptera, mainly Formicidae, had more genera than others, accounting for 80% of the total genera in this group. The diversity of soil animals in this plot was very low because the H′ index was only 1.2, while the DGs index was 4.0 and the DGg index was 1.3. A total of 61 families or genera belonging to 23 orders were found in the “south plot”. Malmcoangelia and Tetramorium were the main groups, which accounted for 60.3% and 10.2%, respectively. Two genera of Annelda and two genera of Isopoda only accounted for 2.6% and 1.9%, respectively, but they were considered to be major groups due to their large body sizes and the distinct characteristics of their habitat. Acarina had a greater number of individuals and families or genera with its individual number accounting for 67.5% of the total, and the number of families or genera of this group account for 70% in this plot. The diversity indexes (H′, DGs and DGg) in this plot were significantly higher than those in the “north plot”, and were 1.65, 16.7 and 7.75, respectively. In the “control plot”, there were 67 families or genera of soil animals belonging to 23 orders. The main groups were Tetramorium (20%), Lasius (17.1%), Bothriomymex of Formicidae (13.8%), and Malmcoangelia of oribatid mites (14.5%). Formicidae of Hymenoptera was the group with the maximum number of individuals, accounting for 51.0%, while Diplopoda had the most families or genera. The H′ and DGs indexes, being 2.54 and 17.7, were higher than those in the “south plot”, while the DGg index of 7.20 was lower than that in the “south plot”. The results showed that the species composition and diversity indexes were higher in the “south plot” than in the “north plot” and the “control plot”, which demonstrated that using Acacia auriculaeformis forest to restore the oil shale dump was an effective approach in terms of soil biodiversity.
