Chinese farmers frequently use a wheat–potato cropping system. The land area planted to transgenic potatoes is increasing because transgenic potatoes have greater resistance to pests and diseases. However, little is known about the bio-compatibility of transgenic potatoes with wheat straw. The objective of this tissue culture study was to determine the allelopathic effects of wheat straw on transgenic potato seedlings. Seedlings were cultured on normal MS medium (normal treatment) and nutrient-deficient MS medium (acclimated treatment) and then transferred to MS medium, which contained wheat straw powder. Wheat straw powder inhibited potato seedling growth in both treatments. Among the parameters analyzed in this study, inhibition was greatest for plant fresh weight and least for plant height. The inhibitive effects of wheat straw were greater for seedling roots compared to shoots. Resistance to allelopathic pressure from wheat straw was greater in acclimated seedlings compared to normal seedlings. This suggested that previous pressure may have induced tolerance in the transgenic potato seedlings. Furthermore, growth inhibition of potato seedlings from the normal treatment increased as the amount of wheat straw powder in the culture medium increased. Calculations indicated that the presence of wheat straw would lead to a 55% reduction in the total biomass of normal potato seedlings compared to a 39% reduction for acclimated seedlings. Parameters such as net photosynthesis rate (Pn) and quantum yield (Y(II)) changed as the nutrient content of the culture medium increased or decreased, but the changes in the parameters were smaller for acclimated seedlings compared to normal seedlings. This suggests that nutrient status during the culture period could help transgenic potato seedlings adapt and compensate for energy loss from seedlings in defending against allelopathic pressure. In summary, the results show that previous exposure to pressures such as nutrient deficiency may increase the allelopathic pressure resistance of transgenic potato seedlings.
