Abstract
Objective: The pupose of this study was to investigate the validity and reliability of the computer attitude scale (CAS) in physical education teachers of Kurdistan.
Methodology: Two hundred sixty nine physical education teachers in the Kurdistan province were selected randomly by the table of Kerjsai and Morgan (N=900). The instrument of this study was the standard questionnaire of computer attitude scales (Loyed and Gressard). This scale consists of these sub scales: anxiety, interest and confidence and includes 30 statements of congruity and incongruity about the attitude towards computer. In order to make the questionnaire reliable, content face reliability (the opinions of the specialists) and construct reliability (Exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis) were used and in order to validate the questionnaire, ? chronbach (anxiety sub scales, confidence and interest in computer were 0.77, 0.71 and 0.77 and all the scale 0.82) was used.
Results: on the basis of the factor analysis results, four factors were determined. However, significant variance difference was demonstrated through the first factor, when we considered the Persian form as one-factor. All variables of this factor demonstrated negative attitudes and anxiety towards computer use among physical education teachers. Also, according to the coefficients of the mentioned ? chronbach we can consider the Persian form of CAS scale as having an excellent reliability. The high correlation between sub scales and the total grade of the scale indicated that all of them measured a specified field of behavior (r=0.69).
Conclusion: Nowadays computer as a supplementary part has changed teaching at all educational levels. So, the understanding of how different factors are in a transaction with the environment and user characteristics are important since effect of teaching and learning processes can lead to pleasant aims. This matter is affected by the attitude towards computer. The investigations in this field demonstrated that there are sorts of resistance imposed by the persons specially teachers and managers and that teachers seldom have a positive attitude towards technology and are afraid of facing it.
Keywords: Validity, Reliability, The computer attitude scale.

