Abstract
Objective: The purpose of the present study was to investigate service quality in sports’ facilities of Guilan University by using the SERVQUAL model.
Methods: This study was descriptive and all the students of Guilan university were the statistical population. Two hundred eighty five students (150 male and 135 female) were selected as statistical sample and responded to the SERVQUAL questionnaire (Parasuraman et al, 1985). This questionnaire consists of 22 pairs of questions on a seven-point Likert-type rating scale (of 1: strongly disagree to 7: strongly agree) that can measure five dimensions of the service quality (Tangibles, Reliability, Responsiveness, Assurance and Empathy) in perceptions and exceptions sections. This instrument is a general questionnaire for measuring service quality and have been modified to use in the sports sector by France et al (2010). In this study the validity of the questionnaire was verified by the experts and the reliability was also calculated in a pilot study (?=0.899 and ?=0.976 respectively for the perceptions an exceptions questionnaire). Wilcoxon and Fridman, independent t-test and repeated measures tests were used to analyze collected data.
Results: The results indicated that there was a negative significant gap between the five dimensions of service quality in sport facilities (p < 0.05). Maximum negative quality gap (-2.64) was observed in tangibles and the minimum of it (-2.18) was in reliability dimension. Other results indicated that respondents’ gender, academic field and educational profile didn't have any significant effect on their perceptions of service quality in university’s sports facilities.
Conclusion: Since a negative gap was observed in all dimensions of service quality in sports facilities of Guilan university, it is recommended that managers and directors of the University pay attention to improve their service quality in university’s sports facilities in order to increase students’ attendance in university’s sports programs. Also, the paper provides valuable suggestions for improving sports facilities offering services.
Keywords: Service quality, Sports facility, SERVQUAL model.

