Abstract
Objective: The purpose of this study is to investigate the physical education and sport sciences graduates’ employment status in Iran.
Methodology: The sample of this study consists of 115 physical education and sport sciences faculty members of higher education institutions, major sport managers and graduates of physical education and sport sciences who were selected as a non-random target and had the expertise and experience on the research topic. To gather the data, library sources, literature review, background analysis, interviews, forms and questionnaires were used (a SWOT identification form that contained open and close questions, internal factors questionnaire, external factors questionnaire, and a form of employment strategic positioning). For determining validity of the it questionnaire was reviewed and confirmed by 14 faculty members of sport management and entrepreneurship. Finally, in the pilot study on 30 subjects the internal consistened of questionnaire by Cronbach's alpha was (r=0.94). For analyzing research hypotheses ,the Friedman rank test, internal factors evaluation matrix (IFE) and external factors evaluation matrix (EFE) and strategic position and action evaluation matrix (SPACEM (were employed.
Results: Having analyzed environmental situations (internal and external) of physical education and sport science graduates’ employment, 18 strengths, 40 weaknesses, 33 opportunities and 33 threats were identified and their priorities were determined. The results showed that physical education and sport sciences graduates’ employment in Iran was located in the worst position possible (T-W & defensive area).
Conclusion: Depending on the conditions for explaining employment strategies of physical education and sport sciences graduates, besides using ST, SO and WO strategies, using WT strategies is also recommended.
Keywords: Employment, Graduates of physical education and sport sciences, Strategic action and position evaluation matrix (SPACEM).

