Objective: The global incidence of hemophilia is almost uniformly distributed and is estimated to be 1: 10 000. It is therefore logical that increase in birth rate has a direct influence on the incidence of hemophilia in a given community. At best conditions of control, with presume for legalization of abortion of all affected male fetuses, the female carriers will still transfer the genes in a given community and the problem persists. Therefore, the only other option that is left to control the incidence of this disabling and resources consuming disease is birth control.
Methods: In this retrospective study which was designed to find out the degree of impact of implementation of birth control law as well as the effects of administration of factors VIII
and XI, and Blood, Bank, Productions, Material as Crayoprecipitate FFB in the treatment of this disease, on the incidence of birth of hemophiliac children over 30 years among 100
affected families (86 hemophic A, 14 hemophic B Family) in Khozestan. All patients in these families (113 hemophilia A, 24 hemophilia B) (totally 137) were participated in this study. Others 534 none hemophilic children (alive, dead, or aborted) were used as hemophilia
patients indicators.
Results: The results showed a dramatic decrease in both the mortality and morbidity in years
between 1972 to 2000, following the administration of factors VIII and XI and Blood, Bank, Productions, Material as Crayoprecipitate FFB for treatment of this disease. Correspondingly, due to low standards in implementation of family planning, birth rate in both hemophiliac and normal population increased during these years. With implementation of family planning in 1992, birth rates dropped resulting in decrease in incidence of hemophilia.
Conclusion: These findings confirms that the first step in the control of incidence of hemophilia is better implementation of family planning programmes as set by WHO standard scale of one or two child/family with 3 to 4 years apart. Strict implementation, possible by better educational propaganda, can have important impact on our community and can facilitate using the limited health funds in other more important fields of health promotion.
