Purpose-The research aims at evaluating the standardization/adaptation of international marketing strategy in Iran
multinational companies (MNCs) based a model in which the impact of external environmental variables on the
marketing mix internal variables (i.e. Product, Promotion, Price and Place) is considered, while in the previous
researches no attempt was done to examine the interdependency of these internal variables. The present researchers
tried to delineate the role of this reciprocal relationship in dictating the organization marketing strategy.
Design/methodology/approach-The research is classified as a descriptive research which tries to fill out the existing
gap in the practical framework presented in standardization/adaptation debates. The research seeks to fulfill an
applied objective as well as finding some appropriate approaches for its studied sample. Decision Making Trial
Evaluation Laboratory (DEMATEL) and Analytical Network Processing (ANP) are the methods used in studying
these two groups of variables.
Findings-The presented model and relations resulted from the DEMATEL and ANP methods implementation show
that (1) there is a relationship between the internal affecting factors which means that there is interdependency
between these variables and (2) the standardization/adaptation strategies are employed to some degrees. In case of
the studied sample the standardization strategy proved to have a higher degree of application as compared to the
adaptation strategy.
Originality/value-The obtained data reveals that there is interdependency between the internal effecting factors or
marketing mix elements (4Ps).Therefore, the internal and external factors need to be considered simultaneously in any
attempt to determine the international marketing strategy. It is also recommended that two multi criteria decision
making methods- DEMATEL and ANP -can be used at the same time in order to solve the international marketing
strategy problems.
