Background and objectives : The infeections resulting from Salmonella typhi and non typhi Salmonella are still of special significance in many parts of the world especially in developing countries. Different types of Salmonella have increasingly become resistant to the common antibiotics used in therapy. Our main objective was to study of antibiotic resistance Pattern of isolated Salmonella strains, from treatment centers in Iran and other countries, so that effective measures could be taken in the treatment of Salmonella infections.
Methods : One hundred Salmonella strains isolated from different clinical samples including fences, blood or (SF , bile , vomit and urine were studied.
Me clinical samples were cultured in the selective and differential media. using biochemical tests, the strains were identified and the Salmonella antiserum (bioMerieux) were used. Sensitivity tests of the isolated strains was carried ow using the disc-agar diffusion  method. Finding : 0/ 100 strains 63% were isolated from blood, 26% from stool, 1% from CSF, 2% from bile, 7% from vomit. The isolated organisms were identified using biochemical and serologic tests and were arranged in the order of freguency of occurrence as: 40% strains. Salmonella enteritidis, followed by Salmortalla typhi 23%, S typhimuriurn 19% and others. All of the tested strains, were sensitive to amikacin and ceftazidim, 9N% of them were sensitive to Nalidixlc acid, which were the highest percentages of sensitivity. only 5% of strains were sensitive to streptomycin.
Conclusion : The Prevalent Salmonella strains isolated in this study belonged to S ettteritids, S typhi with pronounced presence of non typhi groups. All of the tested strains, 100% of them were sensitive to amikacin and cefiazidim. The comparison of these results with obtained results from similar studies in Iran and other countries shows that aminoglycosides, third generation cephalasporins and quinolones are at present the most promising drugs for the treatment of infections by Salmonella.
