Introduction & Objective: Trichomoniasis is a disease which caused by Trichomonas vaginalis and is the most common reason for non viral sexually transmitted disease and is the third cause of vaginitis which brings millions of people to women clinics.The main problem with this protozoa is the diagnos's of symptomatic cases and treatment of patients and also their sexual partner to avoid chronic infection and dissementation of parasite. The common way for diagnosis of Trichomoniasis is microscopical study of vaginal sample. Considering the diagnosis symptomatic cases just based on clinical observations, this study aimed to compare the clinical and microscopical diagnosis of trichomoniasis in women who referred to the Yasuj women clinics.
Materials & Methods: In this study a vaginal sample was taken from women who had clinical symptoms of vaginitis and refered to Yasuj clinic (63 cases) by the use of swap. Samples in were transferred to the laboratory in dextrose saline solution. Results of microscopic diagnosis was compared with clinical diagnosis considering personal characteristics such as age, using contraceptive, clinical symptoms and type and color of discharge.
Results: Out of 63 patients which their vaginal discharge was studied, 12 cases (19.04%) in clinical examination and 27 cases (42.9%) by the use of direct microscopic observation were positive with Trichomoniasis. Of the 27 positive cases, 10 cases were considered to have trichomoniasis by clinical observation and others (17 cases) had been diagnosed as other vaginitis.
Conclusion: There was a significant difference between clinical diagnosis and microscopical diagnosis of trichomoniasis . No significant difference was found between clinical symptoms and diagnosis of trichomoniasis. So we can not use just clinical symptoms for diagnosis of trichomoniasis. By considering just the clinical symptoms we can not diagnos positive cases of trichomoniasis in more than 60% of cases and as a result they undergo unnecessary treatment.
