Introduction & Objective: The burden of psychiatric disorders in the developed countries has been identified by the screening questionnaires and standard clinical interviews at a high level, but the epidemiological studies of psychiatric disorders in our country are brief and their numbers are few. Planning for providing essential mental health services to the people requires us to be knowledgeable about the present status of psychiatric disorders in the society. The objective of this research was to carry out the epidemiological study of the psychiatric disorders in the individuals 18 years and above in urban and rural areas of Kohgilouieh & BoyerAhmad province. Materials&Methods: 337 individuals selected through randomized clustered and systematic sampling methods from among the existing families of Kohgilouieh & BoyerAhmad province and the Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia (SADS) questionnaires completed by the clinical psychologist. The diagnosis of the disorders was based on DSM-IV classification criteria. Results: The results of the study showed that the prevalence of psychiatric disorders in the province is 23.17 percent which was 36.73 percent in the women and 9.92 percent in the men. The anxiety and neuro-cognitive disorders respectively with 13.37 and 5.04 percent had the higher prevalence in the province. The prevalence of psychotic disorders in this study was 1.49 percent, mood disorders 1.19 percent and dissociative disorders 2.08 percent. In the group of neuro-cognitive disorders, epilepsy with 4.15 percent and in the group of anxiety disorders, phobic disorder with 7.43 percent had the higher prevalence. Conclusion: This study showed that 11.28 percent of individuals that were studied suffered from minimum one of the psychiatric disorders. The prevalence of psychiatric disorders in the province among the individuals in the age group of 56-65 years and with 17.65 percent, married individuals 14.02 percent, residents of urban areas 15.38 percent, illiterate individuals 14.68 percent and house wives with 14.53 percent was more than other individuals in the sample. Being aware of this matter reveals the responsibility of the health policy makers and programmers, prevention, treatment and medical education more than before in relation to preparing application and executive plans in Kohgilouieh & BoyerAhmad province for mental health.
