The effective elements in the formation of rural co-ops are not detachable from the effective factors in socio- economic cooperation on the side of villagers. The effective elements in cooperation are also under the influence of effective factors in creating stimuli in the people to be inclined toward collective and socio-economic oriented activities. The study of effective elements on people's motivation to get involved in co-ops is one of the most important issues that play a key role in planning for cooperatives, especially rural ones. Without consideration of human incentive as the main clement of development and without understanding the complexities of man's behavior, co-ops arc expected to experience failure.
Studying the obstacles in the development and growth of the activities of co-ops and removal of them in future plans in the form of up-down procedure and creating incentive in the villagers to take part in cooperative and collective activities and informing them about these activities are of great importance and undeniable facts.
What are the effective elements in people's positive view toward establishing co-ops and what is the degree of the priority of those elements? The answers to these questions help planners to have a wider view of co-op plans and pave the way for the growth and development of them so that the accelerating elements increase and the hindering ones are removed or at least reduced. To attain this objective, the present study has categorized the elements into three groups of social, economical and local ones, based on the justified action theory of Izen and Fichbien. Attempts are made to identify the effective elements in the villager's readiness in the formation of rural co-ops and determine the priorities of the factors contributing to this readiness. For this reason eleven villages out of 50 located in the county of Ghanavat and 254 villagers out of the total population of 7579 with the age range of 15 to 64 were selected through the Kokeran formula in a simple random selection method to identify the effective elements in villagers' readiness in the formation of co-ops. Using the K.2 test by the SPSS software, it is proved that from among the social elements, the effect of residential status (being a native to the area or not) the role of the government, the role of cooperation and knowledge about co-ops are more influential with the 0.05 Alpha. And, from among the economical factors, the effect of job condition (employed unemployed) , type of job and risk factor are more influential with the same Alfa. In addition, the hypothesis that the incentive for collective activities is not dependent on economical factors alone, rather, a combination of socio-economical factors is effective in this process, Proved right by the test.
