With regard to the expansion and development of the agricultural sciences and the introduction of so many innovations and new techniques by the researchers and experts in agricultural sciences for agricultural extension agents to be fully equipped with technical and professional abilities, their undergoing some in - service education is urgent. Here, what needs great attention is the quality and the way these educational programs are rendered. Basically, the first step and perhaps the most important phase in the planning process of the educational courses for the in - service education of the agricultural extension agents, is the assessment of their Professional - Educational needs. since the desirable outcome, expected of these courses, depends largely on the proper operations carried out to evaluate these professional - educational needs, The main objective of the present research was to develop a method to inspect, gather and rank the above needs. In this research, first, extensive literature review was carried out to evaluate the models and methods used to assess the extension agent professional needs. Then, by taking Iran's agricultural extension condition into consideration a comprehensive model was designed to estimate the agricultural extension agents Professional - Educational needs. The instruments for evaluating of the model were constructed. To achieve the goal of the research, target population was the agricultural extension agents, supervisors and instructors of in - service education courses for extension agents. Samples were selected according to two stage random sampling, consisting of 60 extension agents, 30 supervisors and 20 instructors. The research instrument consisted of two questionnaires: one specially made for extension agents and the other for supervisors and extension instructors. The face validity and reliability of the instruments were confirmed by four extension and education experts as well as two experts from agricultural organization of Far Province. along with the use of test - retest method.
