The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of different grazing intensities on perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne) tiller and white clover (Trifolium repens) stolon, size/density compensation (SDC) patterns. A rotational grazing experiment using perennial ryegrass/white clover pasture and four grazing intensities was conducted from April 1999 to December 2000. Increased grazing intensity significantly decreased weight and increased density of ryegrass tillers (P < 0.05), but had the opposite effects on white clover stolons. Tiller/stolon weight and density also varied with seasonal sampling date, and there were also significant (P < 0.05) grazing intensity × time interactions. For ryegrass, the slope for the SDC relationship log(weight) versus log(density) in year 2000 was −1.74, consistent with recently published theory that grazing intensity gradients will produce SDC relationships steeper than −3/2 as a result of lower sward LAI at higher grazing intensity. The comparable slope for the reverse SDC pattern in white clover was −0.98, indicating that clover achieved near constant herbage mass across grazing intensities. Intercepts for the SDC relationship of both species moved upward in spring to a maximum in summer and downward in autumn to a minimum in winter. Other observations included significant increases (P < 0.05) in ryegrass and white clover leaf numbers per tiller or stolon, respectively, in June, with these increases typically persisting until August. White clover also developed an increased (P < 0.05) number of leaves per stolon at higher grazing intensity in June and August. Under all grazing intensities, the population biomasses of ryegrass and clover were positively correlated across micro-sites within plots (P < 0.05 or less). Operation of a reverse SDC pattern in white clover associated with constant mass across razing intensities may partly explain at a functional ecology level, the well-known stability of ryegrass–white clover species associations.
