About Five decades have passed over the first empirical field investigations on the types and degrees of Religiosity, as well as the developments thereof. As for the first Religiosity model, presented in early 60's by Gerhard Lensky, the related dimensions and indices have tolerated a number of modifications. Two features did, however, exist in all: having been originated in Christianity, and affected by western historical-social developments. The two characteristics continued to add to the difficulty of applying the models to conflicting religious and social backgrounds. This however, has never made the investigators deprived of the possibility of doing practises on Religiosity with some of the more famus measures. Enjoying a background of one decade of doing Religiosity investigations in Iran, during which the shortcomings of the currently used models and frameworks were revealed, a new spirit prevails in the country to treat and apply measures originating in Islamic docrtines and compatible with the related social conditions; a comprehensive model and a standard measure are now seen in the perspective. The present article attempts to follow the same objective on the pictured ground by way, first, of providing the reader with a definition of Religiosity then, presenting to them some of the most ramous models, to pave the way for creation of a "Religiosity measurement model for Iran" on the background of studies and criticisms of them.
Religiosity has its own dimensions and components, resulting from different aspects of religion, and, in turn enjoys relations with different aspects of man's existence. The proposed model on the one hand endeavors to meet the logical relations and proportions among these entities and, on the other, to reveal the manifestations of Religiosity, such as its deep "effects" and "implications", that are measurable.
The final section of the present research comprises mentions of a few basic iems necessary for running and development of the model into a practical measure, as well as explanations on a number of basic terms. Comments on the part of the specialists regarding the shortcomings, as well as proposals regarding any relayed reinvestigation will highly be appreciated by the author.
