In agricultural higher education system, educators play significant roles on influencing other sectors and the total function of the foundation. Surveying of the main problems and difficulties on agricultural education system of country indicates that the lack of designing, fulfilling and evaluating of in-service educational course contents are considered as the most important problems of agricultural higher education, especially in the aspect of technology and vocational studies. Analysis of these problems shows that most of these problems are due to the lack of difinding the educators professional education needs. In this regard, the present research was conducted along with the objective of determining the educators vocational and educational needs in agricultural higher education centers and institute. The kind of research was cause-correlation and by the use of questionnaire instrument, the insight of 210 people agricultural trainers was surveyed. These individuals were selected by the census system in all agricultural Technology & vocational higher education institutes and centers. The opinions were assessed and surveyed on the importance of issues, trainers knowledge about the subject and trainers skills about the application of the issues. The validity of the research instrument had been proved by 15 educational specialists and its reliability was determined by Cronbachs alpha coefficient (./98). The findings of the research indicated that the last educational degrees at the time of joining the training centers, teaching record in higher educational courses and the kind of the degree have made many different insights among the educators in measuring and evaluating the agricultural trainers. On the other hand, the most important educational needs of the educators vocation and education in agricultural higher education centers and institute are: recognizing how to use internet, to obtain agricultural education research findings, and determining learners educational needs about agricultural technical problems and research in agricultural education science.
