Introduction: It is estimated that four out of every five women treated for ovulatory hype rmenorrhea have no anatomic pathology, and more than one third of hysterectomies are carried out for the same symptom. The use of various medical therapeutic options for these women has potential for elimination of large number of surgeries and complications associated with them.
Objective: The Objective of this research is to determine efficacy of Mefenamic Acid and Tranexamic Acid on amount of menstrual bleeding of patients with hypermenorrhea presenting to Gynecologic Clinic of Booali Hospital.
Materials and Methods: Fifty patients with hypermenorhea were selected. Randomly 25 patients were managed with Tranexamic Acid and another 25 patients were managed with Mefenamic Acid during first 5 days of menstruation. Age range of patients was between 25 to 45 years old and their parity was less than 5 and their contraceptives were not OCP or IUD.
Gynecologic study such as endometrial biopsy and fractional D & C were performed, if needed, to rule out organic causes.
Patients suffering from other diseases such as peptic ulcer, inflammatory bowel disease, thromboembolic disease and coagulation disorders were not included in study. Efficacy of management were determined with number of pads that were used before and after management with both drugs during first 5 days of menstruation. and results were evaluated with statistical t-test method.
Results: In this study, one patient from both groups was excluded because of incomplete history and continuation of the treatment. From twenty four patients in each group, seven patients from mefenamic acid group and 13 patients from Tranxamic acid responded completely to medical management, because the number of daily pads decreased to <5 sixteen patients in Mefenamic Acid group and ten patients in Tranxamic Acid responded partially because the number of daily pads decreased to 5-7. One patient in each group didn't respond to medical treatment.
Conclusion: This study showed that both the mefenamic acid and tranexamic acid are effective in decreasing the menstrual blood loss and effect of tranexamic acid in decreasing the menstrual blood loss is little more than that of mefenamic acid.
