Background: Pelvic floor disorders such as prolaps of pelvic organ, urinary and anal incontinence are very common in women and almost affect 1/3of them. Determination of risk factors and presenting preventing measures are research priorities. Objective: To determine predisposing factors in postpartum urinary incontinence. Design: This was a case- control study in design information obtained through questionnaire. Sample: Through sampling 180 women were selected (180 in control group and 180 in case group).
Results: The results showed that there were a significant relationship between some personal factors such as age (P=0.00), prepregnancy body mass index (P=0.000), method of washing clothes (P= 0.03), hard working during pregnancy and postpartum urinary incontinence. According to logistics regression hypothesis tests, among the above mentioned factors, age was more related to postpartum urinary incontinence. Also there was a relationship between the obstetric practice, postpartum constipation (P=0.009), urinary incontinence during pregnancy (P=0.00), parity (P=0.00), number of deliveries, head circumference of neonate at birth, first and second delivery spacing, route and technique of the first delivery including normal vaginal delivery with spontaneous beginning or induction, cesarean section, technique of the second delivery including normal vaginal delivery with spontaneous beginning and augmentation or induction, history of forceps delivery, history of breech delivery with postpartum urinary incontinence and among the above mentioned factors, postpartum constipation (P=0.018), parity (P==0.00), first and second delivery spacing (P=0.013), number of deliveries (P=0.33) were more related to postpartum urinary incontinence.
According to logistic test, postpartum constipation, urinary incontinence during pregnancy and parity were more related to postpartum urinary incontinence.    ^ Conclusion: Based on the findings it is suggested to employ proper preventive measures through improving women's knowledge about preventing frequent deliveries, avoiding hard working especially in standing position, proper nutrition and prevention of obesity. In addition, decreasing usage of instruments in deliveries such as forceps or vacuum is helpful in preventing trauma to the pelvic floor muscles.
