Objective: Study of the histological and histomorphometrical changes in the uterus of buffalo in the follicular and luteal phases of estrus cycle.
Design: Comparative study.
Animals: Samples of the uterus along with ovaries were collected from 20 buffalos.
Procedure: The sellected specimens underwent tissue processing i.e. fixation with 10% neutral formlin, tissue Passage, sectioning (5-7im) and stalling with Hematoxylin- Eosin method. In the histomorphometry of specimens the thickness of endometrium, myometrium and perimetrium were measured in micrometer. The thickness of glands and their mean distribution in 0/25 mm2 were assessed.
Statistical analysis: Student "t" study.
Results: Our results presented in two sections i.e A) Histological study: the epithelium of the endometrium was simple columnar and occasionally in some places pscudostratified columnar and simple cuboidal. In the superficial region the connective tissue of the subepithelium was loose but around the endometrial glands it was relatively fibrous form. The myometrium was made up of two layers, i.e. inner circular and outer longitudinal. B) Histomorphometrical study, reveald that thicknesses of endometrium and myometrium in the follicular and luteal phases have not showed significant differences. Although the thicknesses of epithelium and glands and the distribution of the gland in the luteal phase were increased, the differences were not significant, where as, there was significant difference between the gland epithelium and thickness of glands (p<0.01). Conclusion: (1) Increase in thickness of myometrium and perimetrium caused by effect of estrogen in the follicular phase. (2) Progestrone improves the epithelial and glandular thicknesses in the luteal phase. (3) Estrogen also causes branching of the glands. Thus these results confirms the concept that in the uterus of the Buffaloes estrogen and progestrone effects in both the follicular and luteal phases on the epithelium, glands, myometrium and perimetrium. J. Fac. Vet. Med. Univ. Tehran. 58, 1: 53-59, 2003.
