introduction & Objective: Human force employed in organizations is the main resources available to the managers. Management of human resources is perhaps the most important obligation of the manager Activities and behaviors of human being are due to his motivations and needs. With the recognition and prediction of the personnel's motivations and needs, managers can satisfy their needs properly and on time and make use of human forces at his access. This study was performed to investigate the factors affecting the motivation of the staff in Yasuj university of medical sciences in 1382 so that the hierarchy of their needs are recognized and a comparison can be made between their own opinions and the manager's viewpoints. Materials & Methods: this is a descriptive, analytical and cross - sectional study which was performed in 1382. Fifty official managers and 131 personnel of the university were selected through a multi - stage sampling. A questionnaire of 60 two - choice questions were used for data collection and the data were analyzed using SPSS software.
Results: the hierarchy of needs of the personnel appeared to be the same in the view points of both managers and personnel. In this study respect' was considered to be the first in the order. There was also a significant relation between the personnel's needs and the managers' level of education. The managers field of responsibility had also an effect on their view points. There was also a significant relation between the personnel's record of service and their Self- recognition and physiological needs .
Conclusion: Result of this study shows that there is a positive correlation between the order of needs from the viewpoint of the personnel and the managers. This can be due to such factors as native management, record of service, and their level of education. This order of needs doesn't follow that of Maslow in the area of respect and honor and the managers and the staff of the university assigned respect as the most important needs. There was also significant relation between the personnel's needs and variables such as education , record of service and soon.
