Introduction: Sexual desire is one of the most important physiologic needs and motives in human beings. According to Islam teaching, one of things that muslims must refrain from in Ramadan fasting is sexual relation. Objective:The aim of this study is to undrestand the nature of sexual desire changes during fasting in Ramadan. Materials and Methods: Thirty-two healthy, single males aging 24-28 years were studied. During the Holy month of Ramadan, they avoided foods and drinks for about 12hrs according to the Islamic fasting program. Three blood samples were taken from each subject at 5 pm on the day before Ramadan (baseline sample), first and last day of Ramadan. Serum testosterone, LH and FSH levels were determined by RIAs. In addition, all subjects filled out questionnaire that searched for changes in parameters relevant to sexual desire. Results: Testosterone levels in 2nd and 3rd test samples were significantly greater than baseline one (p=0.007,p-0.025 respectively). No traceable changes occurred in LH levels, but FSH serum levels showed significant reduction in 2nd and 3rd samples (p=0.006,p=0.001 respectively). According to the result obtained from the questionnaire, there were significant reduction in frequency of masturbation, thinking about intercourse, thinking about sexual matters and relevant visual enjoyment, and sexual matters when meeting opposite sex (p<0.01 for all parameters). In addition, there was appreciable decrease in frequency of morning erection (p<0.05). In contrast, frequency of nocturnal ejaculation was increased (p<0.05).
Conclusions: Reverse changes between serum testosterone levels and those parameters related to sexual behavior with voluntary aspects, suggest voluntary influences through pathway inside CNS may overshadow peripheral effects of testosterone during Ramadan fasting. So that person can supress sexual desire by reduction in defferent type of stimuli on encephalized portion of sexual desire and this is not equal to depression of reproductive system in Ramadan.
