Rill erosion can be a serious problem on cultivated slopes. Understanding the mechanisms of the detachment process in eroding rills is important in developing and improving process-based erosion prediction models. The detachment rate, defined as the sediment amount detached from a unit area in a unit time, is a crucial parameter in most physical erosion prediction models. Most current studies on rill detachment rates use spatially averaged soil erosion data, which provides little information about soil erosion dynamics due to the lack of spatially distributed, contemporaneous rill erosion data. The objective of this study was to estimate the net detachment rate in eroding rills using a rare earth element (REE) tracing method. Flume experiments were conducted with ten REE oxides (Ho2O3, Tb4O7, Eu2O3, Yb2O3, Dy2O3, Sm2O3, La2O3, Tm2O3, CeO2, and Nd2O3) as tracers mixed with soil in different sections of five slopes (8.74%, 17.62%, 26.78%, 36.38%, and 46.6%) exposed to three water flow rates (2, 4, and 8 L min− 1). Regulated water flow was introduced to the upper end of flumes, 8 m long and 0.1 m wide, which were divided into 10 equal segments, each containing a different REE–soil mixture. The net detachment rate from each rill segment was calculated from the REE concentrations in the eroded and transported material. The detachment rates from different segments along the rills, at different slope gradients and flow rates, were compared with those estimated directly from previous studies, and were found to increase with increasing slope gradient and flow rate. Results also showed that the net rill detachment rates decreased linearly with an increase in sediment concentration, and decreased exponentially with an increase in rill length. The REE-derived detachment data and their relationship with sediment concentrations are consistent with the detachment function used in the WEPP model, and are helpful in understanding the processes of rill erosion. Using REEs to trace detachment rates in continuous rills is a valid and advantageous technique for estimating the spatial distribution of the rill detachment rates.
