Feeding mice conjugated linoleic acid (9 cis,11 trans/9 trans,11 cis-and 10 trans,12 cis-CLA in equal amounts) resulted in triacylglycerol accumulation in the liver. The objective of this study was to examine whether this steatosis is associated with changes in hepatic fatty acid synthesis and oxidation. Therefore, we measured the activities of key enzymes of fatty acid synthesis, i.e., acetyl-CoA carboxylase and fatty acid synthase and of fatty acid oxidation, i.e., 3-hydroxy-acyl-CoA dehydrogenase and citrate synthase in livers of mice fed a diet with 0.5% (w/w) CLA. CLA (a 1:1 mixture of the 10 trans, 12 cis and 9 cis, 11 trans isomers of octadecadenoic acid) was administered for 3 and 12 weeks with high-oleic sunflower oil fed as control. The proportion of body fat was significantly lower on the CLA than on the control diet and this effect was already significant after 3 weeks. The specific activites of 3-hydroxy-acyl-CoA dehydrogenase and citrate synthase were unaffected by CLA both after 3 and 12 weeks. The specific activity of fatty acid synthase was nonsignificantly raised (by 12%) after 3 weeks on the CLA diet but had increased significantly (by 34%) after 12 weeks of feeding. The specific activity of acetyl-CoA carboxylase had also increased both after 3 weeks (by 53%) and 12 weeks (by 23%) on the CLA diet, but this effect did not reach statistical significance. Due to CLA-induced hepatomegaly, the overall capacity for both fatty acid oxidation and synthesis—as evidenced by the total hepatic activities of 3-hydroxy-acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, citrate synthase, acetyl-CoA carboxylase, and fatty acid synthase—was significantly greater in the CLA-fed group after 12 weeks, although the overall capacity for fatty acid synthesis had increased more than that for fatty acid oxidation. Thus, this study indicates that prolonged, but not short-term, feeding mice with CLA increased hepatic fatty acid synthesis relative to oxidation, despite the decrease in body fat and the increase in liver weight seen earlier. It is concluded that the observed CLA-induced changes in hepatic fatty acid synthesis and oxidation are the result, rather than the cause, of the lowering of body fat.
