The hormone-sensitive and lipoprotein lipases are critical determinants of the metabolic adaptation to starvation. Additionally, the uncoupling proteins have emerged with potential roles in the metabolic adaptations required by energy deficiency. The objective of this study was to evaluate the expression (mRNA abundance) of uncoupling proteins 2 and 3 and that of hormone-sensitive and lipoprotein lipase in the adipose tissue and skeletal muscle of the pig in relationship to feed deprivation. Thirty-two male castrates (87 kg ± 5%) were assigned at random to fed and feed-deprived treatment groups. After 96 hr, the pigs were euthanized and adipose and skeletal muscle tissue obtained for total RNA extraction and nuclease protection assays. Feed deprivation increased uncoupling protein 3 mRNA abundance 103–237% (P < 0.01) in longissimus and red and white semitendinosus muscle. In contrast, the increase in uncoupling protein 3 mRNA in adipose tissue was only 23% (P < 0.06), and adipose uncoupling protein 2 mRNA was not influenced (P > 0.66) by feed deprivation. The increased abundance of uncoupling protein 2 mRNA in the longissimus muscle of feed-deprived pigs was small (22%), but significant (P < 0.04). The expression of hormone-sensitive lipase was increased 46% and 64% (P < 0.04) in adipose tissue and longissimus muscle, respectively, by feed deprivation, whereas adipose lipoprotein lipase expression was reduced (P < 0.01) to 20% of that of the fed group. Longissimus lipoprotein lipase expression in the feed-deprived group was 37% of that of the fed group (P < 0.01), and similar reductions were detected in red and white semitendinosus muscle. Overall, these findings indicate that uncoupling protein 3 expression in skeletal muscle is quite sensitive to starvation in the pig, whereas uncoupling protein 2 changes are minimal. Furthermore, we conclude that hormone-sensitive lipase is upregulated at the mRNA level with prolonged feed deprivation, whereas lipoprotein lipase is downregulated.
