Present research was conducted with the objective of the appraisal of ethical growth in persecutive and unpersecutive youth students in shahrekord. The sample of this research was obtained by sampling among the students in guidance and high school. The Data was collected by questionnaire. Eight groups were selected: 15 students contained 13 years old persecuted girls, 13 years old unpersecuted girls, 13 years old unpersecuted boys, 13 years old persecuted boys, 16 years old persecuted girls, 16 years old unpersecuted girls, 16 years old persecuted boys, 16 years old unpersecuted boys. The data was analyzed in descriptive and inferential way. The obtained results from the ethical growth in persecuted and 13 years old unpersecuted youth showed both groups from the ethical growth point of view had not meaningful differences and both put on third stage of the ethical growth of Kohlberg, but persecuted and unpersecuted 16 years old youth showed meaningful difference at the level of ethical growth unpersecuted youth were at the fourth and persecuted youth were at the third step of Kohlberg ethical growth.
It was not observed meaningful difference between 13 and 16 years old persecuted youth from the ethical growth point of view, and both were at the third stage of Kohlberg ethical growth step, but 13 and 16 years old unpersecuted youth had meaningful difference at the level of ethical growth. Thus 13 years old were at the third and 16 years old youth had meaningful difference at the level of ethical growth. Thus 13 years old were at the third and 16 years old were at the fourth step of Kohlberg ethical growth steps. It was defined in the appraisal of parent characteristics in persecuted and unpersecuted youth that there were differences in the father's age, education, occupation, and family financial conditions. In the appraisal of research questions, there were no difference between both girls and boys at the amount of persecuting, although boys obtained high scores in the scale of physical disturbing and also this rate was reported more in 16 years old youth than early 13 years old youth.
