Background and Objective: One of the most current aggressive methods to access to blood vessels intravenous peripheral catheters that contains excess complications and prevention of it is one of important medical goals. Therefore, this study was done to determining influence dressing with gauze sterile using in complication appearance rate of side effects pationts in CCU and having venous catheter.
Materials and Methods: This clinical trial accomplished on 64 patient's hospitalization in CCU and post CCU of Malayer hospital. 32 of patients in the experimental group (use of dressing with gaze sterile) and 32 of patients shelled in the control group (routine) randomly. For data collecting was used check list and laboratory reports, the method was according to following. Form: in beginning, questionnair which contained domographic information completed and then venous catheter was enclosed strility in patient's hand by one person, after the catheter was replaced, placed the gauze sterile on catheter site for the experimental group (routine) then every 12 hours considered the place in aspect of phelebitis and infection to 72 hourse duration. since phelebitis appearing and or finished 72 hours, the angiocat plasticaI tip detached from trunck by sterile bisturi and transferred to laboratory tube containing nutritive materials and sent the laboratory during minumm time possible time it was cultured in a culture environment growing 15 colony number on every platelet was considered as possitive.
Results: 65% of two groups are among 61-70 years old 53.1% of both group are illiterate. The majority of both groups (59.4%) had mycardial ichemic heart disease. Catheter situation in the experimental group 53.7% was in the left hand and the control group 63.1% was in the right hand in aspect of type of used drug 44.1% individuals of the two groups used two drugs heparin and vasodilators. Study's result about phlebitis with P<0.05 showed that the gauze sterile dressing has effected in preventing of it's appearance, therefore statistical fisher test showed that gauze sterile dressing is not effected in preventing of venous catheter's local infection.
Conclusion: The use of the sterile gauze dressing can effect in preventing of phlebitis and colonization.
