Introduction & Objective: Free radicals are formed in all living organisms during normal cell metabolism. Patients with chronic renal failure which are regularly dialyzed are candidates for free radical damage. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of haemodialysis on lipid peroxidation (the level of lipid peroxidation expressed as malondialdehyde) and erythrocyte antioxidant enzyme (superoxide dismutase) before and after the dialysis in haemodialysis patients.
Material & Methods: The sampling procedure was purposive sampling. 22 patients with chronic renal failure(CRF) disease who were haemodialysed at 5"' azar hospital of Gorgan dialysis center and 22 age and sex matched healthy control were recruited for this study. Haemodialysed patients and control groups that received antioxidant medicine and foods were excluded from the study. The data were analyzed by SPSS software using T-student Tests.
Results: Plasma malondialdehyde showed significant difference between the predialysis and control group. it increased in the postdialysis group (2.32 ± 0.38 nmol /ml) compared with predialysis (1.27 ± 0.23 nmol/ml) and control group (0.98 ± 0.17 nmol/ml). Erythrocyte antioxidant enzyme decreased in postdialysis group (951.4 ± 17.71 unit/gram hemoglobin) compared with predialysis (1019 ± 20.06 unit / gram hemoglobin) and control group1402,68 ± 18.3 unit / gram hemoglobin). Erythrocyte antioxidant enzyme was lower in dialysis group than in control group.
Conclusion: The significant difference of erythrocyte antioxidant enzyme between pre and postdialysis phases might be related to uremia. Loss of this antioxidant through membranes during the dialysis process and the decreased antioxidant enzyme might be due to an increase in lipid peroxidation in haemodialysed patients. This situation may play a role in the development of atherosclerosis in these groups. For this reason, control of dialysis membrane and haemodialysis techniques, exogenous supplementation of reactive oxygen species and prevention of sudden atherosclerosis are important in improvement of haemodialysis patients' life quality.
