Introduction: Hemodialysis Patients are at high risk of infection by Hepatitis C virus.A high prevalence of hepatitis C infection in hemodialysis patients has been reported. It causes chronic hepatitis ,and may lead to liver failure or hepatocellular carcinoma.Hepatitis C is a major cause of mortality in patients undergoing hemodialysis.
Objective: This study intends to determine the prevalence and risk factors of Hepatitis C virus infection among haemodialysis patients.
Materials and Methods: This is a cross-sectional study performed on a total of 393 patients in 10 Guilan Hemodialysis Centers. For this study a questionnaire consisting of 25 questions covering demographic data and risk factors of Hepatits C virus infection was designed .Laboratory records of Elisa II assay were used to determine the prevalence of Hepatitis is C virus infection.Data of this research were analysed by SPSS ver. I0.
Results: The results showed that 70 patients (17.8%) were infected to HCV. Also findings showed a significant relationship between duration of dialysis(P=0.0001), frequency of dialysis per week (P-0.0001), history of liver disease (P=0.0001, history of jaundice (P=0.003), history of kidney transplant (P=0.0001), history of contact with infected persons (P=0.0001), history of blood transfusion (P=0.0001), and higher rate of hepatitis C virus infection. There was no significant relationship between sex, age, marital status and hepatitis C infection.
Conclusion:It is concluded that blood transfusion ,duration of hemodialysis, more weekly dialysis sessions, history of previous renal transplantation, history of blood transfusion and history of contact with infected persons, were major risk factors of Hepatitis C virus infection in hemodialysis patients.Some useful strategies to reduce the risk of Hepatitis C virus infection based on this research findings include:1-Minimizing transfusion requirements by the use of Erythropoietin, 2- Implementing more sensitive screening methods to detect Hepatitis virus infection, 3-reducing the duration of the Hemodialysis period by early transplantation, 4-If possible, use separate machine for infected patients, 5-Stricter and more frequent enforcement of universal percautions may be required in hemodialysis centers.
