Introduction:The preinvasive cervical lesions are increased appreciately in recent years.Early diagnosis and management of abnormal pap test has an effective role in prevention of invasive cervical carcinoma and its related mortality.The aim of this study was to assess the prevalence of intraepithelial dysplasia and to compare colposcopic- histologic results in patients with minimaly abnormal papanicolaou smears (ASCUS, nuclear enlargement, low-grade SIL and atypical metaplasia).
Objective: The aim of this study was to assess the prevalence of intraepithelial dysplasia and compare colposcopic- histologic results in patients with minimaly abnormal papanicolaou smears (ASCUS, nuclear enlargement, low- garde SIL and atypical metaplasia).
Materials and Methods:This research was a cross- sectional study that evaluated patients presenting with minimaly abnormal pap test to Gynecology Clinic in Alzahra Hospital (Rasht) from June 1998 to December 1999. All patients underwent colposcopy and biopsy due to suspicious lesions immediately. The results were analyzed with x2 test to calculate differences between the two reports of colposcopy and pap test.
Results: Out of a research sample consisting of 70 people, 49 patients (70%) had histologic SIL (LSIL and HSIL). Histologic intraepithelial lesions were found in 14 patients out of 21 cases (66/6%) of ASCUS group. Among them, one patient was with HSIL and 13 patients were with LSIL. In a total of 18 patients with a positive result of nuclear enlargement pap test, 12 cases (66.6%) were with intraepithelial lesions (2 patients with HS1L and 10 patients with LSIL. In a total of 19 patients with a positive result of intramenopausal and atypical metaplasia in pap smear test, 12 cases (63.2%) had LSIL. Out of 12 patients with positive pap smear result of LSIL, 10 cases (83.3%) were with intraepithelial lesions (3 with HSIL, 7 with LSIL.
Conclusion: Considering the observation of histologic intraepithelial lesions with a high grade in patients with pap smear result of LSIL and nuclear enlargement profile at the age of 30 and above and with regard to ASCUS at the ages below 30, colcoscopy and biopsy are suggested when there is a well- equipped center.
