Introduction: Cannabis use is frequently found in patients suffering psychiatric disorders and studies show that it results in recurrence, need for rehospitalization, diminished efficacy of drugs and worsening of prognosis. Objective: The aim of this study was to detect the relative frequency of cannabis users in patients admitted to psychiatry emergency ward of Shafa psychiatry hospital in Rasht ,Iran, during 2004-2005.
Materials and Methods: In a cross- sectional study, urinary test by RIA search for urinary metabolite of cannabis (THC...) and also an interview with pt; their families was done for all pts having BPRS equal or more than 4, were tested through urinary test for Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),the urinary metabolite of cannabis ,via Rapid immunoassay(RIA) and interview with patients and their families was done.
Each patient was physically examined as well. Variables such as sex, age group, marital and educational status, place of residence and history of psychiatric problems were included in our assessment. Collected data were and analyzed by Chi-square and Fisher exact test (a. = 0.05).
Results: From 404 patients admitted to the emergency ward within 4 months, 20 were excluded for different reasons (such as discharge with own satisfactim, refusal inability to give urine sample). 384 were included in the study. Urine test for cannabis use was positive in 77(20.1%) cases who were all men (THC? 50 ng/ml), thus a significant relation was indicated between sex and positive urine test (p<0.001).In male patients bused on, Clinical interview and family interview proved 96(43.8%) and 184(84%) of them to be cannabis users, respectively.
A significant statistical relation was drawn for the result of urine test and clinical diagnosis according to interview and physical examination (p<0.001). A similar relation was also found between the result of urine test and patient's family report (p=0.024).
Conclusion:According to the results of this study, a considerable fraction of patients admitted to psychiatric emergency ward are cannabis users in our hospital. Preventive ways are commended for lowering this frequency.
