Objective :The current research surveys application of IT in acquisition and cataloguing of resources of central and faculty libraries of Azad Universities located in city of Tehran. The main objective of the research are, identify and determine the amount of hardware and software resources, manpower, and how to use new technology and possible obstacles in the collection and cataloging in the library of Azad University in city of Tehran. This research can also be applied to a study that aims to develop and promote the application of information technology and school libraries in Central University of Tehran.  
Methodology: The method research is analytical survey. Instruments included a questionnaire that the reliability and validity of it has been confirmed. The statistical methods have been used in both the descriptive and inferential. The frequency distribution tables and charts describe the current situation provided for In the inferential statistical test to determine the relationships between variables and the variable has been significantly.
Findings: The findings of research showed in all central and faculty libraries of Azad Universities located in city of Tehran 77.2 % of employees have library education and 20.7% have non-library education. The most hardware facilities in libraries included computers and printers and the most software facilities in libraries included comprehensive library software which is 40% of Nosa software and 37.7% was Pars Azarakhsh soft ware among them in cataloguing used software (82.2%) and the use of them in order section is (2.2%) had the least percentage. 88.9% of libraries lacked independent website and they were using facility of the central library to demand service to users. Besides the book, the most resource being used for acquisition and cataloguing were the thesis. Searching in information centers (48.9) and for this reason searching in Internet was the most area for information gathering that the duty persons were more familiar with them. Using Internet in the field of selecting information resource had the first rank, ordering resources and selection of them stant in second place and information exchange among book keepers, contacting subjective experts and detection of electronic tools were in next places. Related web sites concerning book keeping and organizing of 22 libraries  (48.9%) and search tools with 20 cases (44.4%) were among the most important facilities of Internet which had the most use of  acquisition process among research community.
Conclusion: Totally, lack of funding and experts in cataloging were the most significant difficulties in using these technologies the major problems that hinder the provision of services to students and academics is required .

