Background:  Cultural  psychology  is  a  new  discipline  covering  a 
universalistic  intercultural  version  derived  from  a  specific  historical 
and  cultural  discourse.  Since  Kleinman’s  major  revision  (1988), 
cultural  psychopathology  has  been  reconsidered  with  the  aim  of 
updating  the  previous  reviews,  assessment  of  conceptualizations  and 
current methods,  recognition  of  index  trends,  conceptual  progressions, 
particularly changes in the definition of culture, studying both specific 
and common culture trends, the role of culture in psychiatric diagnosis 
for  DSM-V  and  the  World  Health  Organization  report.  In  the  new 
version,  some  cases  of  diseases  such  as  depression  and  schizophrenia
are included. 
Objective:  The  present  research  aims  to  show  that  mental  illness 
is of a linguisticstructure and study the illness as a cultural issue. 
Method:  The  method  applied  in  this  research  was  that  of 
discourse  analysis.  Discourse  analysis,  as  a  method  of  qualitative 
research,  analyzes  language  and  speech.  The  module  of  discourse 
analysis  is  narrative.  A  narrative  is  a  cultural  text,  or  scientific  theory 
or  social  act.  In  discourse  analysis,  the  researcher  tries  to  recognize 
the  underlying  narratives  of  discourses  through  analyzing  language 
and  speech  as  well  as  interpreting  approaches  and  theories.  Studying 
discourse  patterns  created  during  usage  of  discursive  resources,  the 
analyst aims to identify thesources ofsimilarities and differences. 
Results:  In  recent  years,  research  on  cultural  psychopathology 
has  turned  to  an  important  area  of  study.  The  most  important  issue  inproblem-solving.  The  rate  of  oppositional  defiant  disorder  symptoms 
was  assessed  in  the  three  groups  during  two  stages  of  pre-test  and 
post-test.  The  data  were  analyzed  using  analysis  of  covariance.  The 
results  showed  that  the  average  scores  of  oppositional  defiant 
symptoms  in  the  two  experiment  groups  was  significantly  lower  than 
that of control group (p < 0.001). The results also indicated that training 
both  social-emotional  and  social  problem-solving  programs  is 
effective  in  reducing  the  symptoms  of  oppositional  defiant  disorder. 
Therefore,  the  social-emotional  learning  and  social  problem-solving 
programs  as  the  underlying  skills  of  emotional  intelligence,  social 
learning and interpersonal relationships can be  effective approaches in 
dealing with oppositionaldefiantdisorder.
