Background and purpose: The common method of stabilization in noncancerous lesions of anterior cervical vertebrae is the use of interbody bone graft and instulation of caspar plate and screws which is followed by several complications, breaking or loosing of screw, damage to esophagus and improper fusion of bone graft, as a result, damage to spinal cord during fixing the screw and also expouser of the patient and operation team members to radiation when using fluroscope. In order to overcome these problems, a new method is proposed, that is, use of methyl meta crylate as a bone cement plate system. Main objective of this research is the elimination of screw and plate system in order to study the fusion of vertebraes in control radio graphy after operation.
Materials and methods: In this prospective study, the patients who were operated due to cervical disc or disc herniation and canal stenosis by anterior cervical approach at shafa and Imam hospitals in sari were selected. The patients were 5 men and 5 women with age range of 36 to 77 years. In order to create bone cement plate, methyl metha crylate which is used for cranioplasty was used. This study was done from 1998 to 2001.
Results : This method was used for 10 patients. In the follow up using control radiography during maximum 25 months and minimum 8 months. No complication such as infection, sensitivity and fusion disorder were observed, and in no case there was need of reoperation. Clinical outcomes of operation were satisfactory.
Conclusion: Advantages of performing this method are as follow: easy doing, no risk for spinal cord,no need of special equipment, availability of needed equipments, cost efficiency, MRI compatibility, no need for flouroscope and creation of immediate suitable stabilization. Elimination of screw and plate in this technique would lead to elimination of consequent device related complications. In this method, rigid post operative external immobilization is not required and philadelphia collar is enough.
