Introduction & Objective: Vaccination of children under 1 year of age is one of the most important programs of the country at all levels of the health and treatment organization. Due to geographical dispersion and movement during different seasons of the year, tribal societies are the most vulnerable communities in the field of health services and vaccination. This study aimed at determining the vaccination coverage of children under one year of age in the tribal society of kohkiloyeh and BoyrAhmad Province Materials & Methods: This descriptive cross-sectional study was performed on all the newborns from the tribal society of kohkiloyeh and BoyrAhmad province, who were under the age of one, born between 1.1.81 and 29.12.81. For data collection, a questionnaire was used which contained individual characteristics, types of routine vaccines, the data regarding the injections, and the possible reasons for delay in receiving vaccines.The questionnaire was tested for its content-validity.  Results: The total coverage of B.C.G vaccine was 97%1. The total coverage of polio vaccine was 98.4%, 98,2% and 97.7% for the first, second and third doses, respectively, but it was the same for DPT vaccine. The coverage of hepatitis for the first, second, and third doses was 98.6%, 95.2% and 95%, respectively. The total coverage of polio vaccine at birth was 85.5%. All the vaccines were received with delay. The highest delay was related to first dose (27.6 days) and second dose of hepatitis B (74.3 days), first dose of measles (295.4days) and the least delay was found in polio (10.9 days) and third dose of hepatitis (272.4 days). The main reasons for delay were distance from vaccination station (27.3%), unavailability of health staff (262%) and the mother's lack of knowledge (14.2%). Conclusion: Revision of the programs related to the monitoring of mobile teams of vaccination is necessary to improve the vaccination coverage in tribal communities. Moreover, more health staff is required in order to improve the present status of vaccination in tribal societies.
