Abstract 
Introduction: In recent years, investigations on various species of the genus Centaurea have shown that its extract or secondary metabolites has various pharmacological effects including anti-inflammatory, antinociception, Cytotoxic and etc.
Objective: The aim of this study was to investigate the antinociception, and anti-inflammatory effects of Ethyl acetate fraction of fruit plants Badavard (Centaurea bruguierana ssp.blangerana) on male rats.
Materials and Methods: Different parts of the plant Badavrd were collected from Bushehr, then, powdered and solved by ethanol and then, Ethanol extract was Fractioned. Antinociceptive effects of ethyl acetate fraction was examined by formalin test and tail immersion test and anti-inflammatory effects of xylene test in male rats of NMRI. The rats were divided into 6 groups of 8, including negative control, positive control, and 4 experimental groups. Experimental groups were injected intraperitoneally by 100, 200, 400 and 800 mg/kg of Ethyl acetate fraction. Normal data were analyzed using Anova and post hoc TUKEY test and non-normal data, were analyzed using Kolmogrov-smirnov and Mann-whitney test.
Results: In the formalin test, ethylacetate fraction showed a significant difference (P < .001) in the control group at all doses. The hot water tail immersion test, ethylacetate fraction at dose 100 at times t0, t1, t2 indicated significant differences (P < 0.05) and  at time t3  showed significant differences (P < 0.01), at doses 200 and800 at time t0 significant differences (P < 0.01 ) and s at times t1, t2, t3 significant differences (P < 0.001) in the control group at all doses, at dose 400 at times t0,t1 significant differences (P < 0.05) were observed and at times t3, t4 significant differences (P < 0.05) in the control group .at all doses were seen Test, xylene, ethyl acetate fraction showed a significant difference (P < 0.01 ) or the control group at all doses. Naloxone inhibited the antinociceptive effects of ethyl acetate fraction in the acute phase, but had no effect on chronic phase.
Conclusions: Analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects of ethyl acetate fraction can be attributed to the Sesquiterpenelacton and flavonoids. These compounds relieve nociception and inflammation by inhibition of inflammatory mediators.

