Abstract
Introduction: After elective surgery of head and neck region, one of the complaints of patients is unsteadiness and vertigo. This complaint was seen more in some surgeries in clinical experiences, one of which is rhinoplasty. Given the community's increasing trend to rhinoplasty, considering this complaint of patients is important for appropriate prevention or treatment
Objective: To evaluate vertigo occurrence in patients undergoing rhinoplasty, Amiralmomenin Hospital of Rasht
Materials and Methods: In this case-control study, 63 patients in case group (Rhinoplasty) and 50 patients in control group (Functional Endoscopic Sinus Surgery), were evaluated for vertigo. The two groups were matched for possible confounding factors. All the patients were evaluated for vertigo 1week, 1and 3 months after surgery. Also, in rhinoplastic patients, lateral osteotomy approach was considered as a possible factor. Using SPSS 19, data were analyzed with t and ?2 tests and P < 0.05 was considered significant.
Results: Fifty patients of case group and 45 patients of control group were followed for 3 months. Female patients comprised 80 and 44.4% of case and control groups, respectively. The frequency of vertigo in patients of case group was 17, 3 and 2, respectively. Only one case was due to benign paroxysmal positional vertigo and others were due to orthostatic hypotension. In control group, frequency of vertigo was 11, 1 and 1, respectively. The cause of all cases was orthostatic hypotension. The rhinoplastic patients with external and internal lateral osteotomy approach complained of vertigo in 58.6 and 11.5%, respectively. This difference was significant statistically (P < 0.0001).
Conclusion: This study showed that the most frequent cause of vertigo in both groups is pseudo vertigo and due to orthostatic hypotension. It seems that true vertigo is not associated with operation types (including rhinoplastic and nasal endoscopy). We advised more detailed investigations with larger sample size in this area.

