Abstract 
Introduction: Since the time of OAEs detection, significant development has been made in the field of response recording for both clinical purposes and research on cochlear physiology. One of the most important applications of OAEs is in studying auditory efferent system. This article reviews the physiology of the auditory efferent system and the consequences of its disorder in various clinical populations. Unlike the afferent system, there is a paucity of data regarding the efferent system and this has limited the clinical application of this valuable test.
Material & Method: This study was a review of recent literature on the subject of OAEs test and efferent suppression. Pubmed, ScienceDirect, Google Scholar and Proquest databases were searched for identifying related articles and at last, 40 comprehensive articles with accurate methodology, which addressed the evaluation of efferent system in clinical populations, were considered for this review. 
Result: Little information is available about the performance and features of the lateral olivocochlear bundle (LOCB). Recently, it has been suggested that the LOCB is important in establishing and maintaining normal cochlear functions. The efferent system, as a regulator system, enables the higher cerebral centers to exert their control on the active processes of the cochlea (e.g., electromotility OHCs). Moreover, the activation of COCB has an anti-masking effect in that it increases the signal-to-noise ratio within the hearing system, which in turn, improves hearing in the presence of background noise.
Conclusion: OAEs is a non-invasive, simple and effective method for evaluating the integrity of cochlear functions and the contralateral suppression of OAEs can be viewed as a non-invasive and objective clinical test for the assessment of auditory efferent system. This test has been increasingly utilized in patients with hearing disorders. The results of this test can help clinicians in early diagnosis of various hearing disorders and proper decision making regarding the rehabilitation processes of the affected patients.
Key words: otoacoustic emissions, cochlea, efferent pathways, hearing disorders

