Objective: There is a greater risk of mortality and morbidity for patients with left bundle branch block
(LBBB). In most cases, LBBB is accompanied by left ventricular dysfunction. We investigated
the electrocardiographic characteristics of LBBB patients with and without congestive heart
failure to determine parameters for the follow-up of this group of patients.
Method: In this cross-sectional study, all patients who referred to our tertiary center with LBBB (with
preserved left ventricular function) candidated for cardiac resynchronization therapy were
included between January 2007 and January 2008. Electrocardiographic characteristics such as
QRS notching, intrinsicoid deflection, and QRS duration were compared between two groups.
Result: Seventy-five patients were enrolled (mean age = 60.20±12.55 years, range=18-77). There
was a statistically significant relationship between QRS notching in the precordial leads and
severe left ventricular dysfunction (72.7% of patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction
vs. 27.8% of patients with preserved left ventricular function; p value=0.04). The relationship
between QRS notching in the limb leads and severe left ventricular dysfunction was not
statistically significant (70.7% in patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction vs. 29.3% in
patients with preserved left ventricular function; p value  > 0.05). Our study showed a significant
relationship between QRS wave duration in the precordial and limb leads and severe left
ventricular dysfunction (p value  < 0.05), but there was no significant relation between
intrinsicoid deflection and severe left ventricular dysfunction (p value  > 0.05).
Conclusion: QRS wave fragmentation (presence of a notch in R or S) may be associated with
inactivation and dyssynchronization, both of which can reflect ischemic condition. There are
reports of a correlation between this disorder and dyssynchronization; this can be one of the
causes of the pathophysiology of congestive heart failure. Increase in QRS duration in the ECG
was strongly associated with some changes in left ventricular function and structure, which can
be allied to congestive heart failure. Also, dyssynchronization due to LBBB can increase the
risk of congestive heart failure.
