introduction & Objective : Ice creem is a Frozen product that is made of suitable creaem and other dairy products , sugar , and flavoring agents . It also can contain stablizer and color agents . Nowadays , 80-90% of ice cream in the world is made of solely dairy products and vegetable fats . Since the traditional producers of icecream are numerous , thus the consumption of icecream is very high in the summer . Because of the importance of the subject an, epidemiological study has conducted to screen ice cream on the basis of microbiological contents and hygenic processes , and to determine the regulations of Iranian food and drug administration ( article 13).
Materials and Methods :This was a discriptive - analitic and time - dependent study that all traditional ice cream producers and distributors are screened randomly in Yasuj . The 13th article of Iranian FDA is related to hygenic and technical rules and this article studies them. All producers and distributors are screened regularly during one week .Samples are collected and transfered to reference lab according to hygenic procedures. The samples are tested according to the national standards such as E .coli coliform , salmonella , Aureus bacillus , Saph . aureus . 70% of the producers and distributors had contaminations . In order to determine the source of the contaminations , samples of raw materials , milk , water , containers , during transportation, workers hands are taken . All data are collected and input to computer using spss soft ware , and findings are analized .
Results: 70% of the samples had microbial contaminations . The sources of contamination were produced , transfered and held by containers and workers hands . Working places are infected by coliform (80%) , E. coli (50%) , Staph . aureus (40%) , serus bacillus (10%) and Salmonelli (0%)The whole Samples were contaminated by coliform (51.5%) , E. coli (17%) , Staph . aureus (28.6%) , serus bacillus (1.5 %) and Salmonella (%). 50% of workers had no hygienic card. 70% of producing Pcenters were not protected against insects and had grooves on the walls.There was a meaningful and significant relation between in crease of workers experience and decrease of contamination retes. According to Fischer test, there was meaningful relation between those workers had high school diploma and thouse who did not.
Conclusion: According to the study , producing and holding containers were contaminated up to 100% by Coliform . Workers and containers were contaminated 71.4% and 52.1% by E.Coli respectively Holding containers 57.1 % , workers hands 45.4 % , producing containers 14.3% and tarring containers zero percent Water and milk had no microbial contaminations.
