Introduction: Patients with chronic renal disease are arced with numerous problems and complications. And it affects all aspects of patients life and eventually the quality of it. Objective: This comparative - descriptive study was conducted to compare dialysis patients' Quality of Life from patients and nurses' perception admitted to Razi Educational Dialysis Center in 2002 Materials and Methods: The sample chosen by survey, consisted of 18 nurses and 126 patients undergoing hemodialysis_ The data collection instrument included demographic characteristics and three scales of QOL. (Contril's Self -- Anchoring Striving Scale, Index of well-being, and 'l'ime - T Trade -- Off Health State Utility Score). Descriptive - analytical statistics (Independent T - test, Analysis variance and Pearson' s correlation test) were used for data analysis_
Results: The results from patients' perception showed a significant relationship between their QOL, and level of education and income in all three scales. In addition a significant relationship b/w their QOL, and place of living (P<0.03) and occupation (P<1.005) in index of well- being scale and between age (P<0.003) and place of living (P<0.00 I) in Cantrell's Self- anchoring striving scale was shown and it indicated that the independent variable of QOL is positively correlated with dependent variables of occupation, number of children, predisposing diseases.
The results from nurses' perceptions of patients QOI, indicated a significant relationship with sex (IWB) and with marital status and work experience in hemodialysis wards (SASS).
Overall in all three scales, there was a significant correlation between patients and nurses' perceptions of QOL. T- test analyses showed a significant difference between the scores in both groups; in IWB (p<0.001) in SASS (P<0.{)2) an in TTO (p<0.005) Patients' perception of their QOL. is lower than nurses' perception of patients QOL.
Conclusion: Identifying the difference between nurses and patients' perception on QOL is important in care planning and intervention and it also helps nursing managers to assess the quality of nursing care provided to these patients.

