Due to the competitive use of available water resources, it has become important to define appropriate strategies for planning and management of irrigated farmland. To achieve effective planning, accurate information is needed for crop water use requirements, irrigation withdrawals, runoff and nitrate leaching as a function of crop, soil type and weather conditions at a regional level. Interfacing crop models with a geographic information system (GIS) extends the capabilities of the crop models to a regional level. The objective of this study was to determine the irrigation requirements, annual runoff and annual nitrate leaching for the most important crops of the Tibagi river basin in the State of Parana, Brazil. The computer tool selected for this study was the Decision Support System for Agrotechnology Transfer (DSSAT) version 3.5 (98.0) and its associated crop modeling and spatial application system AEGIS/WIN. It was assumed that farms within the same county use similar management practices. To achieve representative estimates of irrigation requirements, the weather data from stations located within each county or the nearest weather station were used. A weighting factor based on the proportion of soil type and crop acreage was applied to determine total annual irrigation withdrawals, annual runoff and nitrate leaching for each county in the river basin. The model predicted outputs, including yield, irrigation requirements, runoff and nitrate leached for different soil types in each county, were analyzed, using spatial analysis methods. This allowed for the display of thematic maps for irrigation requirements, annual runoff and nitrate leaching, and to relate this information with irrigation management and planning. The maximum annual irrigation withdrawal, runoff and nitrate leaching were 22,969 m3 per year, 31,152 m3 per year and 1488 t N per year in the Tibagi river basin. This study showed that crop simulation models linked to GIS can be an effective planning tool to help determine irrigation requirements for river basins and large watersheds.
