In northern Ethiopia, where traditional (farmers) irrigation management on Vertisols is widely practiced, sustainable food security has always been a challenge. The reasons for this are multi-dimensional, but of utmost importance is, low-tech irrigation water management. The main objective of the present study is, therefore, to examine technologies of irrigation water management that might enable farmers to increase water productivity (WP) on vertisols.

A comparative study has been undertaken between the traditional irrigation management (every furrow-traditional scheduling) and alternative water management options on maize plots in northern Ethiopia. The options include alternate furrows-scientific scheduling and every furrow-scientific scheduling. A field experiment was undertaken over two irrigation seasons (1998/1999 and 1999/2000). Results were compared on the basis of yield, WP and economic productivity concepts.

Yield-based comparison has shown that every furrow-scientific scheduling generates the highest yield levels followed by alternate furrows-scientific scheduling. The yield increase (by every furrow-scientific scheduling) over the traditional management was found to be 54%.

WP-based comparison has shown that alternate furrows-scientific scheduling generates the highest WP values followed by every furrow-scientific scheduling. The increase (by alternate furrow irrigation, scientific scheduling) over the traditional irrigation management was 58%.

Economic productivity-based comparison has shown that the highest economic return was obtained from every furrow-scientific scheduling followed by alternate furrows-scientific scheduling. The increase in income (by every furrow-scientific scheduling) over the traditional irrigation management was 54%.

The overall observation is that depending on the availability of water and labour resources, one can decide to use either of the alternate management options to obtain economically reasonable yield. In northern Ethiopia, where water is limiting (and not labour), every furrow-scientific scheduling can be an option.
