The objective of this study was to compare soil water measurements made using capacitance and neutron probes by means of a water balance experiment in a drainage lysimeter. The experiment was conducted in a 5-year-old drip-irrigated peach orchard (Prunus persica L. Batsch, cv. Flordastar, on GF-677 peach rootstock) planted in a clay loam textured soil located in southern Spain. Four drainage lysimeters (5 m × 5 m × 1.5 m), each containing one tree, were constructed and equipped with one lateral line containing eight drippers per tree, with a discharge rate of 2 L h−1. Three access tubes for the neutron probe (NP), symmetrically facing three PVC access tubes containing the multi-depth capacitance probes (MDCP) were located perpendicularly to the drip line (0.2, 0.6 and 1 m). The results demonstrated that both the capacitance and neutron probes gave similar soil water content values under steady state hydraulic gradient conditions (0.2 m from the emitter) although some discrepancies were found in heterogeneous soil water distribution conditions (1 m from the emitter), which might be attributed to the smaller soil volume explored by the MDCP compared with the NP. Explanations for the discrepancies between both devised are presented. When water inputs and outputs were fairly constant, the volumetric soil water content could be considered to represent field saturation (θsat = 0.36 m3 m−3). When drainage was zero, there were 2 days when the soil water content was constant and could be considered as field capacity (θfc = 0.31 m3 m−3). The findings suggest that: (i) capacitance probes can be used for continuous real-time soil water content monitoring unlike the manual measurements obtained with the neutron probe; (ii) the location of the sensors is critical when used for drip irrigation scheduling and our recommendations for practical agricultural purposes would be to place MDCP sensors in the place representing the highest root density, leading the sensors to become biological sensors rather than mere soil moisture sensors; and (iii) on average, the water balance values determined by lysimeter match those calculated using the data from both probes. However, due to the smaller soil volume explored by MDCP, more of these sensors must be used to characterize the soil water status in water balance studies.
