Investigation of the interaction of surface water (SW) and groundwater (GW) is critical in order to determine the effects of best management practices (BMPs) on the entire system of water resources. The objective of this research was to develop a modeling system for considering SW–GW interactions and to demonstrate the applicability of the developed system. A linked modeling approach was selected to consider SW–GW interaction. The dual-simulation scheme was developed to consider different time scales between a newly developed surface model: Dynamic Agricultural Non-point Source Assessment Tool (DANSAT), and existing groundwater models; a three-dimensional finite-difference groundwater flow model (MODFLOW) and a modular three-dimensional transport model (MT3D). A distributed and physically based DANSAT predicts the movement of water and pesticides in runoff and in leachate at a watershed scale. MODFLOW and MT3D simulate groundwater and pesticide movement in the saturated zone. Only the hydrology component of the linked system was evaluated on the QN2 subwatershed in the Nomini Creek watershed located in the Coastal Plain of Virginia mainly due to lack of observed data for MT3D calibration. The same spatial scale was used for both surface and groundwater models while different time scales were used because surface runoff occurs more quickly than groundwater flow. DANSAT and MODFLOW were separately calibrated using the integrated GW approach which uses own lumped baseflow components in DANSAT, and using the steady-state mode in MODFLOW, respectively. Then the linked system was applied to QN2 based on the parameters selected for DANSAT and MODFLOW to simulate time-dependent interactions on the entire system. The linked approach was better than the integrated approach for predicting the temporal trends of monthly runoff by improving the monthly Nash–Sutcliffe efficiency index from 0.53 to 0.60. The proposed linked approach will be useful for evaluating the impacts of agricultural BMPs on the entire SW–GW system by providing spatial distribution and temporal changes in groundwater table elevation and enhancing the reliability of calibrated parameter sets.
