Background & Objective: Diabetes is one the most common non-communicable diseases and a serious health problem in the world. Nowadays, keeping on a specific diet has an important role in type 2 diabetes. One of the basic principles in prevention of complications in these patients is promotion of patients' knowledge level with regard to treatment method, signs, complications and nutrition. In order to plan nutritional education for diabetic patients, having basic information of their knowledge is necessary. The goal of the present study was to determine knowledge level of type 2 diabetic patients who attended endocrine clinic of Rasoul Hospital.
Method: By a cross-sectional study, 160 known type 2 diabetic patients who had referred to endocrine clinic of Rasoul Hospital were assessed through convenience sampling. Method of collecting data was a questionnaire with 2 parts filled out by interview. In part one, demographic characteristics(age, sex, literacy, duration of disease, ...) and in part two, nutritional knowledge level of patients was studied. SPSS version 11.5 was used for data analysis. Considering score for questions, knowledge with regard to anysubgroup of diet and total knowledge as a continuous variable was determined. T test,-corretation, and ANOVA tests were used to compare knowledge score between demographic variables.
Results: In this study, 160 type 2 diabetic patients were studied. About 51%(81 subjects) were women and 49%(79 subjects) were men. Mean of age was 61(±13). 26.3% and 57.5% took insulin and pills respectively. Mean of diabetes duration was 10.5(±6.4) years. 32% did not use any specific diet. Average score of knowledge with regard to types of dietary subgroups was: 15.8 out of 21 for bread and cereals, 14.7 out of 21 for meat, 12.2 out of 20 for dairy products, 11.5 out of 21 for lipids, 11.4 out of 15 for vegetables, 11.2 out of 17 for fruits, and 15.3 out of 21 for others. Overall mean of knowledge was 92(±12) out of 130. There was a significant positive association between nutritional knowledge and literacy. Also, there was a significant negative correlation between age, duration of disease and their knowledge. Patients with family history of diabetes had significantly more knowledge than others.
Conclusion: Nutritional knowledge level of diabetic patients in this study was average. Considering this result, control of diabetes complications with proper education can be useful.
