Comparative studies of drainage and leaching under tillage systems in irrigated tropical and sub-tropical Vertisols are sparse. The objective of this study was to quantify drainage under cotton-based cropping systems sown on permanent beds in an irrigated Vertisol. Drainage and soil water storage were measured with the chloride mass balance method and neutron moisture meter, respectively, during the 2002–03, 2004–05, 2006–07 and 2008–09 cotton seasons in an on-going experiment in a Vertisol in NW NSW. The experimental treatments were: cotton monoculture sown either after conventional tillage or on permanent beds, and a cotton–wheat rotation on permanent beds where the wheat stubble was retained as in situ mulch into which the following cotton crop was sown. Subject to in-crop rainfall, irrigation frequency varied between 7 and 14 days for cotton and 2–3 months for wheat. In 2005, a split-plot design was superimposed on the existing experiment such that the main-plot treatments were irrigation frequency (“frequent”, 7–14-day irrigation interval; “infrequent”, 14–21-day irrigation interval), and sub-plot treatments were the historical tillage system/crop rotation combinations. In comparison with cotton monoculture sown either after conventional tillage or on permanent beds, soil water storage, particularly during the early part of growing season when rainfall provided the major proportion of crop water requirements, and drainage were greatest when a cotton–wheat rotation was sown on permanent beds. Seasonal drainage out of the 1.2 m depth, averaged among all seasons, was of the order of 25 mm, 33 mm and 70 mm with cotton monoculture sown either after conventional tillage or on permanent beds, and a cotton–wheat rotation on permanent beds, respectively. Soil water storage and drainage were also greater when irrigation frequency was greater. Seasonal drainage out of the 1.2 m depth, averaged between the 2006–07 and 2008–09 seasons, was 54 mm with “frequent irrigation”, and 28 mm with “infrequent” irrigation. Infiltration was less in management systems which resulted in wetter soil; viz. frequent irrigation or a cotton–wheat rotation on permanent beds with in situ stubble retention. Drainage water losses in a furrow-irrigated Vertisol may be reduced and soil water storage increased (i.e. water conservation improved) by sowing a cotton–wheat rotation with in situ stubble retention under less frequent irrigation.
