A qualitative survey as a .focus group discussion of effective factors on exclusive breastfeeding am! continuation has been accomplished in urban and rural areas of Khorasan, Seninan. Kordestan and Gilan provinces for the first time in Iran. The study was carried out with the cooperation of health deputies of the related university of medical sciences and health services.
The objective was obtaining the points of views of the three attendant groups (successful and unsuccessful mothers in breastfeeding and health workers) on the bases of the type and style of nutrition among children one year of age, factors influencing mothers ' success in exclusive and continuing breastfeeding,- sick infants, sick mothers; working mothers, pregnancy and breastfeeding and the effects of services of physicians, health workers, mass media and advertisements on breastfeeding.
In this regard representatives.from each of 4 provinces were trained. In each province mothers who had one to two years-old children, were interviewed in two groups of successful and unsuccessful in breastfeeding in two sub-groups (rural and urban). Also interviews with health workers in rural (behvarzes) and urban (officers with bachelors or post-diploma degree) groups were conducted. There was one interview for 8-10 participants everyday, which took 1.5 - 2 hours. After every interview, all notes were reviewed and summarized. Finally, 48 preliminary notes, 24 summaries and 12 general reports of the provinces were analyzed. The most outstanding outcomes are as fallowing:
Most of health workers and mothers had good and comprehensive information and right believes about the importance of breastfeeding; feeding infants on demand, not using pacifier and bottle, important role of mothers ' nutrition and health on her breastfeeding; husbands' support: supporting the new, low experienced mothers; continuing breastfeeding for sick children (in diarrhea and etc). But some mothers had lots of wrong believes or incomplete information about: when and how to start the complementary food; type of complementary foods; breastfeeding during breast problems,' mothers ' illness and using the chugs, preserving expressed mother milk, etc. In addition physicians in the private sector were not familiar with topics developed in governmental sector and educational subjects in governmental sector are miscellaneous. On the other hand health workers' instructions have more effect on continuance of breastfeeding in comparison with mass media and. finally some mothers were .successful in breastfeeding even though their practice were inconsistent with their knowledge and believes, about exclusive breastfeeding.
