     Linear-Repetitive projects are a special group of projects in which some activities repeat in different parts or units. As resources of similar activities are moved in the frequent units, so it is important to consider maintaining their work continuity. For this reason and because of particular nature of these projects, their scheduling using traditional methods such as critical path method would be too exhausting and time consuming. Therefore, in this research we develop a new method for optimizing linear-repetitive projects scheduling aiming minimization of project duration or cost or time-cost trade off. This approach schedules the project focusing on resource work continuity while the precedence relationships are satisfied. In addition, it considers various time-cost relationships (such as linear, non-linear, continuous or discrete ones) to provide a more realistic schedule. Another superiority of the proposed model is allowing useful interruptions during some special activities performance while focusing on maintaining crew work continuity in the whole of the project. In other words, there is a smart balance between interruptions and crew work continuity with regard to the objective functions. In order to achieve the goals, the model uses a Genetic Algorithm-based problem solver approach to determine the most appropriate duration of activities and their start time in each unit or section. It consists of a planner algorithm to dictate physical principals of these projects and a Genetic Algorithm as search engine to find the optimum results. An example project is scheduled with different objective functions to illustrate the proposed method capability. Eventually, after analyzing its defects coming from lack of consideration to some effective factors such as variable personnel productivity rates and possibility of similar activities performing in different units simultaneously, an improved model is introduced to eliminate these shortcomings. This new comprehensive model will be presented in following research.
