Background and Purpose: In recent years, the use of online technologies in education,
opportunities for the use of modern methods of learning and effective teaching methods has provided.
This phenomenon affects on education and learning opportunities to develop and SY, access to
educational resources and training has helped facilitate the process-learning using network technologies
(e.g. Internet) in order to design, implement and continue to deliver teaching and learning is the learning
environment. The main objective of this study views the students about the use of e-learning system and
its related factors in the Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences in 1390, respectively.
Materials & Methods: This study used a descriptive cross - sectional on all the students spent
three semesters were performed. The questionnaire includes 26 questions that Standard by Dawkins and
colleagues of the five options (from high to low) and in six dimensions (access to technology, constant
communication, motivation, learning through the media, Internet chat and e-learning success) is.
Results: The findings indicated that the positive attitude the students about all aspects of
electronic learning (access to technology, constant communication, motivation, learning through the
media, Internet chat and e-learning success) Dashtndv University School of Pharmacy 3 access to
technology, online communities and e-learning success had the most positive, while the 3 'motivation,
learning through media and Internet chat group had the least positive. Other findings also suggest that the
moderating variables: age, sex and education level of 5% error in the dimensions of e-learning has a
significant relationship (p? 0/05).
Conclusion: : According to the results and positive outlook Medicine and Pharmacy students
towards e-learning can be concluded that the students and Pharmacology, Mazandaran University of
Medical Sciences ready for the implementation of e-learning are relatively acceptable.
Keywords: oral, Basnef, student
