Introduction
Nowadays, feeling of insecurity is the origin of many difficulties and disorders. Public dissatisfaction and other social disorders are in one way or another linked to feeling of social insecurity. Today, building a secure society is not possible unless there is a firm belief in "security" as the most significant value of the society. Social security has two dimensions: subjective and objective. In objective point of view, social security means creating secure life conditions for its members, and in subjective point of view, security means the feeling of being secure. Accordingly, security has a direct relationship with people's mentality and perception. If members of a society perceive that social security is decreasing in their community, at first, they may take it as a subjective reality but then it may unconsciously become an objective one. Therefore, in such conditions it is not possible to bring back the former state of trust and peace of mind. Now the absence or decrease in security may firstly be supposed as an inner feeling, but at a worse state it can appear as a social phenomenon, the public belief in this area may cause the society to pay high costs to bring back the security (Rabbani, 2007:2). Thus, the female students -as a group in this society- need to feel secure occupationally, mentally, physically, or financially. Since if this group of society have some difficulties (feel insecure), they can't fulfill their responsibilities. Now, the first question is: to what extent do the female subjects under study feel insecure? And the second question is: what is the role of social investment in improving social security? This article is an attempt to answer these two questions based on theoretical and experimental approaches.
 
 
Materials and Methods    
The method used in this study is a survey in terms of type and is temporary in terms of time. It was implemented in 2010. To collect the data a researcher- made questionnaire with closed answer was used. To analyze the data Amos 18 and SPSS were used. In this article, we used both descriptive and inferential statistics. To describe qualitative variables we used frequency percentage and to describe quantitative variables we used central indices and dispersion. In calculating inferential statistics and testing the hypotheses, path analysis and regression analysis were used. In the present article, face validity and construct validity with factor analysis were used to measure validity.
 

Table1- Factor Analysis Results of the Constructs under Study
variable	dimension	Factor loading	variable	dimension	Factor loading
Social capital	Network
	.02	Insecurity Feeling	Life Insecurity	.06
	Relations
	.37		Financial Insecurity	.25
	Trust
	.97		Legal Insecurity	.39
	Norm	.54		Mental Insecurity	.91

 
To determine the reliability of the items in the questionnaire Cronbach's Alpha was used. The results showed that internal consistency among items was acceptable. (Table 2)
 

Table2-The Results Reliability Analysis of the Questionnaire Items 
Variable	Reliability Index	Variable	Reliability Index
Life Insecurity	0.891	Network	0.725
Mental Insecurity	0.509	Relations	0.923
Financial Insecurity	0.829	Trust	0.898
Legal Insecurity	0.887	Norm	0.724
     
The subjects of the study are female students of Isfahan University in 2010 school year, whose number according to the university statistics center was 9675 people, out of which 370 students were estimated based on Morgan Table.
     The method of sampling was stratified random sampling; it means that at first based on the ratio of all female students of each faculty to the whole university we determined the volume of the subjects. Then based on the ratio of female students to the faculty, we randomly chose some courses from each faculty and did the final sampling on their students. The statistical unit of the present study is odd. The students range between18 to 30. Most of them (75.2%) were between18 to 24, and the rest (24.8%) were between25 to 30.- 

Discussion of Results and Conclusion
 Providing social security is among the essentials of social order durability. That's why; keeping informed about the level of social security is significant subject. The social security feeling is to be studied from different dimensions including life, financial, mental, and legal ones. Therefore the present article is an attempt to study social investment and social insecurity feeling among female students of Isfahan University. The students' answers show that social trust has a great influence on social security feeling. Ignoring this point culminates in dissatisfaction with organizations and as a result, social order and crime increase.
     The results of regression equation, among all the subjects proved that although the variables of social trust, network, norm, and social relations each had a meaningful impact on social insecurity, social trust was the most influential. According to Putnam theoric strategy, trust strengthens the bond among people. In addition, it improves correlation among society members. A meaningful correlation between social trust and insecurity feeling proves his theory. The results of this study proved it too. So this part of the theoric results was applicable on our subjects.
     According to Giddens, the more secure a society is, the more its members trust in it. The meaningful correlation between social trust and   social security proves this theory. So this part of the Giddens theory was applicable on our subjects.
       Finally, it is worth to emphasize that little storage of social investment could be known as a kind of poverty and lack of occupation. If the sources of social investment are not enough, social insecurity increases and as a result, there will be high rate of crimes.

