Introduction & Objective: One of the objectives of preoperative preparation is evaluating the status of cardiovascular and respiratory systems and determining possible abnormalities. This study aimed at decreasing mortality and morbidity rate, cost of hospitalization and achieving post operative initial respiratory status function. As respiratory problems result in more sever complications, it is crucial to get information about its integrity. Thus, the present study also tried to assess the value of chest x- Ray in comparison to clinical examination for diagnosing pre-operative respiratory problems.
Materials & Methods: This is an applied study. performed on one hundred patients (53% female and 47% male) in Nikocari educational and therapeutic center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences. Physical status of the patients was class I and ii based on ASA (American Society of Anesthesiologists) classification. Simple improbable method was used for sampling. In this study all the patients were filmed on their chests in radiology department and they were all visited by the anesthesiologist clinically. Results of both evaluations were documented for further decision-making. A questionnaire was employed for data collection. Then the data were analyzed using descriptive statistics.
Results: Patients ranged from 55 to 98 years of age. 31% of them had normal chest films but 30% had projection of aortic arch. In 15% lung hilum was prominent and there was an increase in bronco-vascular view of the lung in 11%. 8% of the cases showed an increase in interstitial tissues. Emphysema and probable engorgement of IVC was reported to be in 4% and 1% of them, respectively. Clinical examination showed that 33% of the patients suffered from pulmonary disorders and the rest were all normal.
Conclusion: Because almost all abnormal radiographic findings were also detected by physical examination, it is recommended that, for the preservation of energy and time of radiology personnel, prevention of break-down of chest X- Ray machines and avoidance of imposing extra payment on patients, radiography of chest be specified only for the patients with pulmonary disease and those who have a positive clinical finding. Routine chest X- Ray is also suggested for the patients over 60.
