Introduction & Objective: Leishmaniasis is one of the zoonotic and six tropical disease which WHO had recommended its study and investigation. Each year 300 million of people are exposed to disease and 12 million are infected with this disease.
Materials & Methods: In this disease the scar was investigated in 4 seasons, 6 age groups, 2 sexes (male and female) and 8 villages. In home-to-home and school surveys a total of 960 individuals of  different age groups were studied. The frequency of number of sores in different age groups and individuals with different sore number range, sore percent on different parts of the body, Analysis of variance of sore number medium in age groups and also in various seasons and villages, correlation of sore number with age increase carried out by Kendall coefficient, comparison of sore number medium in two sexes by t-test and Chi -square, are Analytic testes in this study. Results: The age groups 5-9 and >25 had the most and the least number of sores, respectively.(10.76 , 0.88) Most of tested individuals had 0-2 of sores and the most percentage of sores was 
observed on legs (35.4%). Sore number medium in different age groups showed meaningful difference in one-way Analysis of  variance (p<0.005), but there was not any meaningful difference in sore number medium in seasons (p = 0.41) and villages (p = 0.99). Correlation Kendall's tau coefficient showed negative correlation between sore number and age increase(p = -0.46). on the other hand, the t-test did not show any meaningful difference between sore number medium in sexes (x2 = 1.15 , P =0.76). The above result was not meaningful either by Ki-square.
Conclusion: The age groups 5-9 and 10-13 are the most susceptible age groups to leishmaniasis and in reality this disease is more prevalent among Elementary students. In most of people the number of sores was few and on the whole, the most percentage of sores was observed on the legs. It seems that, duo to their participation in agricultural activities in villages, females are infected with this disease to the same extent as males. These sores are present throughout the year, therefore, there is not a meaningful  difference in sore number medium in different seasons of the year.
