Objective(s): Osteoporosis remains a major problem following kidney transplantation. Radiographic measures of bone mass are of limited predictive value after transplantation and are complicated by preexisting renal osteopathy. Quantitative ultrasound (QUS) is a new and noninvasive method to assess skeletal status. However, limited data exist on ultrasonic bone parameters of phalanx after renal transplantation. We evaluated this method in osteoporosis diagnosis in renal allograft recipients in comparison to DXA. Also QUS results in these patients were compared to results of normal matched controls.
Methods: Forty-two patients (age 40.17 ± 11.9 years) were studied 2.8 ± 2.9 years after transplantation. We used 49 healthy matched individuals for age and sex as controls. A Lunar device (DPM-MD) was used for DXA scanning and QUS of phalanx was done in all using a DBM-Sonic 1200 device. Results: Osteoporosis found in 19% of all patients (9,5% in femoral neck, 9.5% in total region of femur and 9.5% in spinal region). Sensitivity of Ad-SOS (parameter measured with DBM-Sonic 1200) for osteoporosis diagnosis in above regions was respectively 100%, 75% and 25% and its specificity for that diagnosis in above regions was respectively 45%, 43% and 37% (there was not significant relation between them). Mean of Ad-SOS (amplitude dependent speed of sound, the parameter measured in QUS of phalanx) was 2036 ± 79 in transplanted patients and 2060 ± 86, in controls. There was no significant difference between two groups. Age, height and BMI were significantly related to Ad-SOS. Age and BMI had negative relation with Ad-SOS (P-values 0.027 and 0.001).Ad-SOS had a positive relation with height (P-value = 0.013).There was no correlation between Ad-SOS and weight, dialysis lime, time after transplantation, cumulative steroid dose and cumulative cyclosporine in transplanted patients. Conclusion: Our data suggests that QUS of phalanx is not a good way for assessing the changes of bone in renal transplanted patients in comparison to healthy individuals, but may be used as a screening technique for osteoporosis. For establishment of diagnosis, patient must be examined with DXA.
