Research into partnering performance measures for building and construction projects becomes crucial because a growing trend of client organizations has been observed to adopt partnering approach to procure their projects worldwide over the past decade. Although there are some related research studies and papers documented on this research area, few, if any, comprehensive and systematic research studies focus on developing a comprehensive, objective, reliable and practical performance evaluation model for partnering projects in construction. A Partnering Performance Index (PPI), which is composed of seven weighted Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), has been developed to measure, monitor, improve, and benchmark the partnering performance of construction projects in Hong Kong. A set of Quantitative Indicators (QIs) and well-defined ranges of Quantitative Requirements (QRs) for each QI have been further established using the Delphi survey technique and Fuzzy Set Theory. Evaluation of partnering success can now be based on quantitative evidences, thus tackling the subjectivity of performance evaluation. By making use of the Internet and database technology, PPI can be monitored on-line, thus saving much time, cost and efforts on data collection and retrieval than if they are done manually. As such, an Internet-based computerized partnering monitoring and benchmarking tool, namely the Computerized Partnering Performance Index System (CPPIS) has been developed. The Internet-based CPPIS enables project participants to input data at any time and location and the project administrators could perform data analysis via the Internet. The CPPIS also enables project managers to measure, monitor, improve and benchmark their partnering performances against those already stored in the database. Graphical presentations of data and various performance measures are also built in to assist various end-users to identify problematic areas and critical success factors for achieving partnering excellence.
