In resent decades cities and metropolis have been faced rapid growth. At such conditions, public transportation system need more ability to response these application. In addition, welfare increasing and more income have been led to using of private vehicles. Base on what above mentioned, many problems such as traffic congestion, air and sound pollutions driving events and etc, have been increased. Isfahan metropolis such as other cities faces so problems. There are many important indicators to get sustainable development, like rapid and light traffic, safe and suitable transportation, therefore developing the public transportation systems are effective ways that can help to expand public services in cities. Methodology of study is based on combination of -Analytical – descriptive method. In this research role of the (BRT) system by using of documentary – field, method has been analyzed. Transporting means a movement process of people or goods form one place to there place, and the purpose of public transportation is to provide complex of services and facilities for improving traffic. There are bus and underground rail way the most important. There are many of theories around transportation: * A.Soria theory: He emphasis on the role of urban pass networks that public vhicles move on. * Eugen Henard theory: He believes that the underground rail way is the best. * Lecbusier theory: His theory "great city" is based on traffic and transportation. * Ebenezer Howard theory: He believes that the public railway network will solve the traffic problem. * Dawid Banister theory: He emphasis on the role of small vehicles that use of hydrogen fuel. * Lewis Mumford theory: He offered a new idea “town les Highway ". * Colin Buchanan theory: He defines an important role for the pedestrians and improvement of public transportation. A) Descriptive findings: There are 50.3% Male and 49.7% Female among the 400 sample. They have been distribution in various age group, (15-30, 31-60,+60). There are 30.1% employment and 60.9% un employment, 35% of them have enough income and 65% have not current income. The rate of BRT using, indicates: 40% considerable and 23% much considerable. Objective of BRT using among them is different: noneyoal 2.7%, wotking 18.8%, shopping 9.8%, to get educational centers 4.3% administrative and health services 18.5% and other thing are 3.3%. They have also stated varied reasons for using of BRT system, safety 9.3%, low cost 31.5% , speed 37.8% , easy acceptable 8.8% , quality 5.8%, environmental reason 2.8% and other things are 4.3%. B) Analytical findings: 1 hypothesis: BRT efficiency has been successful in Isfahan transportation system. By using of K2 hyphothsis1 has been tested, SPSS analysis indicates that rate of Sig is less than 5% , so, hyphothsis1 is confirmed. 2 hypotheses: the most of people have stated their satisfaction of BRT system. For measuring satisfaction rate 17 questions have been established, Sig rate in the whole of questions is less than 5% , therefore 95% assurance rate can confirm, people satisfaction. It also indicate that crowed of people in buses and low services on bus stops are not acceptable. Using of the various tests indicate the positive role of BRT in Isfahan, however the rate of indexes are different. Expanding of electronic city. To change the urban transportation symbol To establish more facilities on stops and suitable position. Increasing private and individual space in the buses.
