Introduction: Science, research, culture and politics are interdependent. Advent of developments in each of these fields can not be realized without establishment of the coordinated developments in other fields in a sustainable way. Research is one the key ares in the area of national security.
Quality and quantity of scientific products are the most important indicators for national development in the country. At present, there is a great gap between the scientific products of Iran and many other countries in the world. Despite the increased rate of research credits as well as the increased number of investigators in our country, there is no appropriate increase in number of research projects approved by Iranian universities of medical sciences and in number of internationally published articles. Thus, we attempted to investigate the deterent factors and the constraints for research among the main elements of universities (faculty members).
Objective: This study was carried out to determine the deterent factors for implementing the research projects from viewpoint of faculty members in Guilan University of Medical Sciences in 2003.
Materials and Methods: Present study was carried out in a descriptive method by using a questionaires developed by Fonk et. al and its validity and reliability was established. The questionnaire was given directly to all faculty menbers of Guilan University of Medical Sciences (N=28) and finally, 186 people answered. Data were analyzed by statistical software of SPSS and inferential statistics.
Results: Examination of results showed that administrative and organizational factors in view of faculty members were the most important deterent factors for research. The majority of faculty members (76.9%) as assistant- Professor believed that authorities and mamagers didn't pay attention to the results of applied research while the majority of faculty members as educators (87.6%) believed that there was no strong motivation for research.
Conclusion: Research limitations can be eliminated by effective leadership and management in the field of research in universities and by establishment of research facilities and possibilities such as establishing research consultation nucleus and shortencd period of time for assessment and approvement of research projects and by reduction of teaching hours and educational duties and by establishing opportunities in the areas of research and by enabling research areas by faculty members.
