Objective: Ticks are parasite that can cause anemia by blood sucking in different animals in addition to some factors which are transmitted by ticks. Therefore, identification of ticks in each area is important in prognosis of the potential of presence of the transmited diseases. Design: Descriptive study.
Animals: Totally, 5491 animals including 3992 sheep, 695 goats. 426 cattle, 329 camels and 48 astray dogs were subjected to study. Procedure: While inspection animals, to determine the number of the present ticks on the skin of animals, inspecting the above mentioned the researcher examined three zones of the body including ear, head and below the tail and perianal region and around of mammary glands in females and, scrotum in males. After counting the ticks, they were removed and transmitted to Alchohol-Glycerin for the diagnosing of Genus and Species.
Statistical analysis: Descriptive statistics.
Result: Totally, 6259 ticks were found which included 3 Genus and 9 Species namely, Rhipicephalus bursa, R. sang uinu.s, Hralomma anatolic::mt excavahim, H. a. ana(olictini, H.drem edarii, H. schul_ei. H.detritum, ii.asiaticum a.siatictmn and Ornithodords lahorensis. In the foregoing study Rhipicephalu.s bursa was mainly found in sheep, goats and dogs. Ilvalomma anaiolicum excavatum in cattle and I1. dromedarii in camels. The highest level of infestation by ticks in cattle was concentrated in the cast of Gannsar which has the largest number of animal farms, in sheep and goats, this
{ concentration was located in south of Garmsar, in camels and dogs. , in the north of the city. Astray dogs as compared to the animals in the above study, showed the highest degree of infestation by ticks (83.3311'0). The average number of ticks on the animals in this study in Gannsar was found to be fewer than 10 and the highest number was observed in goats in the cast of Garmsar.
Clinical implications: Regarding the role of Rhipicephalus bursa and at a lesser rate R. sanguinus in the transmission of Bohemia .spp. in cattle, sheep, goats, horses and dogs, also the role of Ilyalonmra spp. in the transmission of Theiluria spp.. dipping is one of the most important methods for the control of protozoa at one month intervals from early of spring. In camels, Ornithodurrrs lahorensis can have a role in the transmission of Anaplasrna. However, further studies are necessary to improve its role. 
