Drilling is an essential operation in the assembly of the structural frames of automobiles and aircrafts. The life of the joint can be critically affected by the quality of the drilled holes. The main objective of the present paper is to investigate the influence of some parameters on the thrust force, torque and surface roughness in drilling processes of fiber-reinforced composite materials. These parameters include cutting speed, feed, drill size and fiber volume fraction. The quasi-isotropic composite materials were manufactured from randomly oriented glass fiber-reinforced epoxy, with various values of fiber volume fractions (Vf), using hand-lay-up technique. Two components drill dynamometer has been designed and manufactured to measure the thrust and torque during the drilling process. The dynamometer was connected with a data acquisition, which installed in a PC computer. This set-up enable to monitor and record the thrust force and torque with the aid of a computer program that designed using Lab View utilities.

The results indicate that the start point of torque cycle is delayed by few seconds (depending on the value of feed) than the thrust force. This time is consumed to penetrate the specimen by chiseling edge. After the thrust force reached its maximum value it is gradually decreased during the full engagement of the drill and goes to zero when both the chisel edge and the cutting lips have exit of the laminate. In contrast the torque was gradually increased up to the end of the cycle and sudden jump to a value about 10 times the peak value. Cutting speed has insignificant effect on the thrust force and surface roughness of epoxy resin. For glass fiber-reinforced epoxy composites (GFREC) with Vf=9.8–23.7% the thrust force and torque were decreased with increasing cutting speed. On contrast increasing feed, drill size and fiber volume fractions lead to increase the thrust force and torque. The drilled holes of GFREC with lower Vf ratio at lower feed have greater roughness than that drilled at higher feed. Specimens with high Vf ratio have a contrary behavior. Drill diameter combined with feed has a significant effect on surface roughness.
