Delamination is a major problem associated with drilling fiber-reinforced composite materials that, in addition to reducing the structural integrity of the material, also results in poor assembly tolerance and has the potential for long-term performance deterioration. Delamination-free in drilling different fiber reinforced thermoset composites is the main objective of the present paper. Therefore the influence of drilling and material variables on thrust force, torque and delamination of GFRP composites was investigated experimentally. Drilling variables are cutting speed and feed. Material variable include matrix type, filler and fiber shape. Drilling process was carried out on cross-winding/polyester, continuous-winding with filler/polyester, chopped/polyester, woven/polyester and woven/epoxy composites. A simple inexpensive accurate technique was developed to measure delamination size.

The results show that the presence of sand filler in continuous-winding composites not only raised the values of cutting forces and push-out delamination but also increased their values with increasing cutting speed. In contrast, increasing the cutting speed in drilling cross-winding, woven and chopped composites reduces the push-out delamination as a result of decreasing the thrust force. The thrust forces in drilling continuous-winding composite are more than three orders of magnitude higher than those in the cross-winding composites. Chopped composites have lower push-out delamination than those made from woven fibers. For the same fiber shape, the peel-up and push-out delaminations of woven/epoxy composite are lower than that for woven/polyester composites. Delamination, chipping and spalling damage mechanisms were observed in drilling chopped and continuous-winding composites. In drilling woven composites the delamination was observed at different edge position angles due to the presence of the braids that made by the interlacing of two orthogonal directions of fibers tows (warp and fill). Delamination-free in drilling cross-winding composites was achieved using variable feed technique.
