This paper explores the metaheuristic approach called scatter search for lay-up sequence optimisation of laminate composite panels. Scatter search is an evolutionary method that has recently been found to be promising for solving combinatorial optimisation problems. The scatter search framework is flexible and allows the development of alternative implementations with varying degree of sophistication. The main objective of this paper is to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed scatter search algorithm for the combinatorial problem like stacking sequence optimisation of laminate composite panels. Preliminary investigations have been carried out to compare the optimal stacking sequences obtained using scatter search algorithm for buckling load maximisation with the best known published results. Studies indicate that the optimal buckling load factors obtained using the proposed scatter search algorithm found to be either superior or comparable to the best known published results.

Later, two case studies have been considered in this paper. Thermal buckling optimisation of laminated composite plates subjected to temperature rise is considered as the first case study. The results obtained are compared with an exact enumerative study conducted on the problem to demonstrate the effectiveness and performance of the proposed scatter search algorithm. The second case study is optimisation of hybrid laminate composite panels for weight and cost with frequency and buckling constraints. The two objectives are considered individually and also collectively to solve as multi-objective optimisation problem. Finally the computational efficiency of the proposed scatter search algorithm has been investigated by comparing the results with various implementations of genetic algorithm customised for laminate composites. It was shown in this paper through numerical experiments that the scatter search is capable of finding practical solutions for optimal lay-up sequence optimisation of composite laminates and results are comparable and sometimes even superior to genetic algorithms.
