Introduction: Nowadays, all arranging plans is based on related data. Similarly, in the field of medicine, mortality data are used in order to check causes of death. The most important point in collecting data is to use death certificates which fulfills all the researcher`s demands. In order to attain this goal, World health organization recommended a uniform and identical death certificate in which there is an emphasis on recording the initiating (i.e. main), background and direct causes of death. The objective of this plan is identification anf prevention of causes of death. This study was performed with the following objectives: Firstly, to determine the percentage of valuable data recorded in death certificates, secondly to determine the percentage of valid certificates in which causes of deaths have been recorded.
Material and Method: The entire death certificates issued during years 75 to 81 have been extracted and recorded causes were studied from two aspects. In order to determine the value of data they were compared with mortality tables in the international disease classification book, and then causes which where not the main cause of death (that have no data value in prevention of death circle according to World health organization) and also certificates without recording validity were determined.
Results: Based on present study the data of 33.1% of total issued certificates were not of value (i.e. the recorded cause was not the main cause of death) and also 2.9% were lacking record validity (recorded causes were not according to World health organization). Among recorded causes in cardiovascular system, the highest prevalence belongs to descriptive diagnosis of cardiac arrest, with 47.2%, which however, has no data value because it accompanies all deaths.
Conclusion: The results from this study show that 36% of the burial certificates were not, compatible with the formula of international directives. In order to ratify the data production process, planning a uniform and identical death certificate should be taken into consideration. For information recording system. training registerers to record useful data, and also creating facilities and insisting on using precise diagnostic tests, could promote data production process.
