Introduction: Gonorrhoeae is one of the sexual transmitted diseases. It is often asymptomatic in women and can cause a variety of complications and sequelaes, if it is left untreated.
Objective: The goal of this study was to determine the relative frequency of gonococcal endocervisitis and some associated factors in women in reproductive age referring to Al-zahra hospital in Rasht from 2002 to 2003). Materials and Methods: This is a cross-sectional study. In this study, all the women who reffered to Al-zahra maternity hospital for family planning and gynecologic disease in 2002-3 were assessed with sequential non-probability sampling .All of the women, who had inclusion criteria, were examined for cervical mucus assessment (for kind and amount). Culture of cervical mucus is a standard method for diagnosis of gonorrhoea infection. So they were referred to a specific laboratory for providing samples of cervical mucus to culture in Thayer-Martin medium. After this procedure, one pathologist evaluated smears. Data gathering form included demgraphics variables like age,education and ...also cause of reffering ,kind of vaginal discharge,history of vaginal infection and treatment, contraceptive methods and results of culture. Analysis carried out with chi-square test by spss.l0 software.
Results: In this study, 1951 women were enrolled. Most of patients 1488(76.3%) were 21-40 years old.The first coitus age in majority of cases were 20-34 years old. 1136 cases (58.2%) had a history of vaginal infection, 1167women (59.8%)were in middle class socio-economic status. Neisseria gonorrhoeae revealed in 1 icases(0.6%) of cultures. There weren't significant correlation between variations like age, first coitus age, parity, education level, socio- economic level, contraceptive methods and gonococcal infection. There was a significant statistical difference between muco-purulent vaginal discharge and gonococcal infection (p<0.004).
Conclusion: Nevertheless, culture of the samples have sensitive, frequency of gonorrhoeae was similar to research that was carried out in Tehran (diagnosed with smear). In comparison with the prevalence of gonococcal infection in Asia,it was 4% and was limited to 0.6% in our study. It appears that the condition of cultural values in sexual relations, rate of gonococcal infection had decreased.
