introduction and objective: Aging decline abilities and
leads to increased risk of falling and subsequently poorer
quality of life. The objective of this study was to identify a
proper assessment for risk of falling among institutionalized
elderly people. In order to accomplish this aim, two
functional assessment methods, Berg scale and tnetti scale, were
used and the validity indices of these methods were calculated.
Design:	Prospective	non - interventional	methodological
discriminative-validation study in order to make a comparative
assessment of the discriminative validity of the two clinical assessment
methods among the elderly people with/ without history of falling.
Methods: The frequency of falls within 6 months among institutionalized
elderly individuals was prospectively studied. Finally; those having had two
or more falls within 6 months were enrolled in the faller group and those
having no falls within 6 months were enrolled in the non faller group.
Participants: Twenty-one women and 33 men (mean age: 75.79, standard deviation /SDI.: 8.47, range: 61-98) independent in their daily activities and able to walk 10 meters using / without assistive devices volunteered to participate in the study with awareness.
Measurements: Background variables included age, gender, use / nonuse of assistive devices, height, weight, number of the drugs used, and number of the diseases; independent variable was history of falling; and dependent variables were the results of the two functional assessment methods.
Results: Independent t test indicated a significant difference between the two groups of fallers and non falters in the mean scores on Berg Balance Scale (p=.0001) and Tinetti Scale (p=.0001). The results of logistic regression test indicated much more disciminalive validity for Berg Balance Scale test than
Tinetti Scale test.Studying the validity of Berg Balance Scale assessment method showed that all validity indices should he regarded as bases for clinical decision.
