The objective of Experiment 1 was to determine a dose and frequency of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonist administration to effectively suppress serum luteinizing hormone (LH) concentration and to delay ovulation when administered to mares. The objectives of Experiment 2 were 1) to determine the effects of subcutaneous or intravenous administration of a GnRH antagonist or oral altrenogest on serum LH concentration in the estrual mare; and 2) to determine the effectiveness of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in inducing ovulation in mares with suppressed LH concentrations. In Experiment 1, mares (N = 20) were randomly assigned and treated with either 5% mannitol (control, single subcutaneous injection, 1 mL, at time 0; n = 5); low-dose GnRH antagonist (single subcutaneous injection, 0.01 mg/kg, at time 0; n = 5); frequent low-dose GnRH antagonist (subcutaneous injections, 0.01 mg/kg, at 0, 6, 18, and 24 hours; n = 5); or high-dose GnRH antagonist (single subcutaneous injection, 0.04 mg/kg, at time 0; n = 5). Both the frequent low-dose and high-dose GnRH antagonist treatments resulted in significantly lower LH concentrations compared with controls at 90, 102, and 114 hours after treatment (P < .05). In Experiment 2, mares (N = 38) were randomly assigned and treated with subcutaneous sterile saline (control), altrenogest (oral), subcutaneous GnRH antagonist, or intravenous GnRH antagonist. LH concentration for the altrenogest group was lower than the control group at 3, 4, 18, and 30 hours after treatment (P < .05). LH concentration for both the subcutaneous and intravenous GnRH antagonist groups were lower compared with the control group at several time points (P < .05). Based on these data, dose but not frequency of administration of a GnRH antagonist lowered LH concentration in the estrous mare but did not delay ovulation. In addition, serum LH concentrations can be lowered and ovulation effectively postponed in mares treated with altrenogest followed by administration of hCG. This indicates that serum LH concentrations can be lowered and ovulation effectively postponed in mares treated with altrenogest followed by administration of hCG.
