Embryonic death plays an important role in infertility in mares, and most of embryonic mortality occurs at an early stage (before day 40) of pregnancy. Previous investigations focused on B-mode sonographic images to determine abnormal pregnancy; however, no study has provided a quantitative and objective method to diagnose embryonic death. Here we developed a new index, “Uterine Index,” using color Doppler sonography to describe alterations of uterine blood flow in physiological and pathological gestations during early gestation. Six Trotter mares were used in this study. The pregnancies were interrupted with a prostaglandin F2α (PGF2α) analog (tiaprost) at days 25, 30, and 40. Three gestations were investigated in each stage. After the PGF2α administration, these mares were examined every 8 hours until the embryonic vesicles were not visible on ultrasound. In the control group, three pregnancies were examined daily from days 12 to 60. The embryo size was measured in B-mode sonography, and the blood flow in uterine arteries was examined in Doppler ultrasound. The resistance index (RI) and uterine index (UI) were calculated. In the control group, the RI values of uterine artery were lower in pregnant side compared with that of the non-pregnant side from day 15 on, and the difference became greater as the pregnancy advanced (P < .05). The UI was close to 0 before week 3 and increased to approximately 10 after week 4. In the PGF2α-treated group, the UI values reduced from pregnancy level to approximately 0. As early as 32 hours before embryonic death, we observed a significant difference of UI values between control and treated mares. On the contrary, the embryo size of treated mares was not different from that of normal mares. Through the analysis of all recorded UI values, we suggest that the UI values 10 and 5 are good values for distinguishing normal pregnancy (UI >10) from embryonic death (UI < 5). If the UI values are located between 10 and 5, a reexamination at intervals of 1 to 3 days is recommended. Our findings demonstrate that the UI is a useful method to diagnose and predict embryonic death in mares by providing reliable and objective information.
