The objective of this study was to compare the repeatability of echocardiographic measurements obtained from different echocardiographic modes and views in healthy adult equids of various sizes, breeds, and thorax shapes. Ten equids (body weight: 120–662 kg; age: 1–26 years) from various breeds, free of cardiac disease, were used in this study. Each animal was submitted to a standardized echocardiographic and Doppler protocol 3 times at 1 day interval. This protocol included the measurements of left and right ventricular, aortic, pulmonary, and left atrial parameters obtained from different views using the bidimensional (2D) or the motion (M) modes, and the measurement of several parameters of blood flow obtained from the pulsed wave Doppler mode. Repeatability of each measurement was estimated on the basis of the residual variance using a linear model and the coefficient of variation of repeated measurements. A two by two comparison of the repeatability of measurements performed in different views was performed using the residual variances in a variance ratio F test. Results showed that repeatability of echocardiographic or Doppler measurements in equids of various sizes, breeds, and thorax shapes are comparable to previously reported results in thoroughbred and standardbred horses. Left ventricular morphologic parameters showed a good repeatability in the classic M-mode right parasternal short axis view at the level of the chordae tendineae, but the 2D-mode right parasternal long axis four-chamber view appeared to offer an interesting alternative measurement. This latter view also allowed obtaining the most repeatable measurement of right ventricular internal diameter. The left atrial diameter was maximal and most repeatable in the 2D-mode left parasternal long axis four-chamber angled view, and the repeatability of the aortic diameter was best in the 2D-mode right parasternal long axis five-chamber view. Finally, aortic systolic time intervals were more repeatable when measured from the Doppler mode as compared with the M-mode. In conclusion, repeatability of echocardiographic measurements in horses could be optimized after the following protocol: (1) M-mode right parasternal short axis view at the level of chordae tendineae to measure left ventricular morphologic parameters, and 2D-mode right parasternal long axis four-chamber as an alternative view; (2) 2D-mode right parasternal long axis five-chambers to measure the aortic diameter; (3) 2D-mode left parasternal long axis four-chambers angled view to measure the left atrial diameter.
