Endometritis is an important cause of infertility in mares. Enrofloxacin is a broad-spectrum antibiotic to which most equine endometritis pathogens are not resistant. The objective of this study was to determine whether enrofloxacin is safe to use as a conventional intrauterine infusion treatment. Nine healthy mares received intrauterine infusions of enrofloxacin (Baytril 100, 100 mg/mL, Bayer Health Care LLC, Animal Health Division) at 2.5 mg/kg daily for 3 days. Ultrasonographic examination and vaginal examinations were performed during the study. Endometrial biopsies were performed before treatment (S0) and 24 hours after the last treatment (S1) to evaluate acute effects. For evaluating chronic effects, biopsies were performed at 14 days (S2) and 60 days posttreatment (S3). Biopsies were graded histologically by the Kenny and Doig category scale. Difference in histological biopsy grade before and after treatment was compared between biopsies by using a repeated-measures one-way analysis of variance. and significant changes in grades were used to assess treatment effects. The vaginal and ultrasonographic examination after intrauterine infusion of enrofloxacin showed that all mares had severe purulent vaginitis and uterine fluid accumulation of ≥2 cm, with ≥1.5-cm thickening of the endometrial wall which persisted in most mares until the end of the study. Histologically, there was acute endometrial ulceration, necrosis, and hemorrhage in biopsy S1 in all mares, categorized as grade III. In biopsy S2, most mares developed fibrosis and inflammation graded as IIb (four of nine mares) or III (four of nine mares). In biopsy S3, fibrosis was extensive and had variable inflammation, graded as IIb (two of nine mares) or III (five of nine mares), with some mares healing to grade IIa (two of nine mares). There was an overall worsening of endometrial biopsy grade from I to III at S3 compared with S0 (P < .001). These results confirm that enrofloxacin is not suitable for conventional intrauterine infusion treatment in mares.
