Introduction & Objective:Mental retardedness is not a disease, but is a complicated phenomenon which can be  prevented and is one of the most difficult problems of the human society. The  first thing that parents must take into consideration is the awareness about mental retardedness. It means that identifying of the disease as soon as 	possible. Mothers must also be evaluated and educated about thei rawareness.  Materials & Methods: This is a descriptive comprative research with the purpose of comparing the knowledge and  attitude of parents who have mentally ill children and those who don't and the  kind of their contacts with their children. The sample consist of 200 mothers with
 mentally retarded children and 200 without mentally retarded children.  These people have been chosen randomly based on the documents  available in welfare organization and the families without retarded children have been chosen based on census available in health centers. Questionnaire was prepared for data collection with three  sections: 20 questions were about charactristics of mothers and mentally retarded children (in the group with retarded children ). 15 questions were about their retardedness according to the likrit criterion. Collected data were analyzed using T-Test, ANOVA, crosscail valus, and prearson correlation coefficient. Results: Result of this study shows that there are differences in attitude and knowledge of mothers with mentally retarded children and mothers without retarded children. The level of attitude and knowledge of mothers with mentally retarded children are lower than those without retarded children. There is a significant positive correlation between both groups in thir attitude and knowledge.  Conclusion: Debate about the result brought about an awarness for the welfare organization and the officials to think about the economic and the social disaster and also social and cultural difficulties in the families with mentally retarded children and make arrangements for the welfare of these families through providing them with jobs, giving more freedom to the mentally retarded children and reducing their stress and economic pressure of their families. There for instead of having these families depended on welfare organizations, we should make arrangements to increase their abilities mentally and financially and also to reduce their social difficulties.
