BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Propofol is one of the latest drug for induction and maintenance of anesthesia. Nowadays the use of it, is increasing because of its fast onset, short effect duration, anti nausea and vomiting effect and post operation well- being. This study was done to compare hemodynamic variations in induction of anesthesia and post operation nausea and vomiting with propofol and thiopental.
METHODS: In this study 100 patients in ASA class I (American society of anesthesiologists) were randomly divided into two groups (each group 50 patients). Both groups were administered with premedication, an equal dose per body's weight. Induction of anesthesia was started with propofol (2mg/kg) in case group and with thiopental (5mg/kg) in control group. Succinylcholine (1.5 mg/kg) was injected to all patients and then tracheal intubation was done. Heart rate and diastolic and systolic blood pressure after premedication, induction of anesthesia were recorded at 1st, 5th and 10th minutes after intubation. Also, patients were followed up in recovery room for one hour because of incidence of nausea and vomiting.
FINDINGS: Data showed that the variation of heart rate with propofol after induction of anesthesia and intubation was minimum but, it increased with thiopental and this difference was considered significant (p<0.05). In both groups, blood pressure after induction of anesthesia decreased and this difference was not significant. But, after intubation in both groups there was an increase of blood pressure that this increase in thiopental group was more than propofol group (p=0.000). In recovery room just one patient in case group and three patients in control group involved nausea and vomiting that it was not statistically meaningful.
CONCLUSION: According to the results, propofol better than thiopental prevents from hemodynamic response due to intubation. So, propofol can be used instead of thiopental in patients who using thiopental is contraindicated or in those who minimum increase of blood pressure is needed during intubation.
