Introduction: AIDS has been noticed as one of the most important world health problems and diseases in last decades. Knowledge and attitude promotion and consequently habits improvement and abstaining from high risk behaviors have been known the major way for control of disease. With regards to its potential risk for our country, this study has been conducted to determine the knowledge and attitude level of health personnel, health connectors, and attendances to health centers about AIDS in the east region of Tehran.
Methods and materials: this descriptive- analytical study has been conducted on 440 samples randomly selected, including 110 health center personnel, 110 health connectors and 220 attendances from 7 health centers in east region of Tehran. A valid and reliable questionnaire containing 25 questions was used for gathering the data. T-test, chi square, ANOVA, Duncan, regression and logistic regression tests were used for analyzing data in SPSS v.11.5 software.
Results: The knowledge highest score was 83.8% for personnel, 77.5% for health connectors and 64.2% for attendances to health centers; and the attitude least score was 75% for each group. There was significant relationship between knowledge level of personnel with sex, age, education level, years of service and kind of service; knowledge level of health connectors with their education level as well as knowledge of attendances to health centers with their age, marriage status, education and job (p<0.05). Significant relationship was found between attitude level of personnel with their sex and education, and of attendances to health center with their age and education (p<0.05). The health connectors' attitude level had not significant relationship with independent variables. The knowledge level of all groups had positive correlation with their attitude. Almost half of the sample had multiple sources for obtaining information, with T.V. as the major source and educational lessons the minor one.
Conclusion: In this study it was found that the most health personnel and health connectors and about half of the attendances to health centers had appropriate level of knowledge about AIDS. The attitude of two-third of the sample was positive. It is emphasized to maintain the knowledge update and perform objective educational programs about this disease.
