Objective:For some clients, with lower extremity, rehabilitation purpose long leg brace appliance is prescribed. Then it will be fabricated by an orthotist then is worn by patient. According to clinical principles, the brace should be as fit as possible with the limb form. So an individual can walks and sits with his or her brace easily. Brace functions
around The joint motion axis. Quality and exact place of
movements are define in biomechanical principles. Therefore,
such brace should be adapted with respecting biochemical
principles of the limb.
A brace is made up several components which are assembled
through acceptable technical orthopaedic methods and this
procedure should be done without omission or neglect.
If orthotist has enough scientific knowledge and observes all details,
he or she will fabricate a perfect brace. We considered fabricated
long leg brace according to this principle to meet study objectives while answering some question of study, we will discuss on the finding of our assessment. Also, we examine some possible deviations with accured by unsuitable fabrication, more over suggesting some failures in designing procedures in which leads to such deviation.
Materials & methods:
In this descriptive analytic cross sectional study, long leg braces of 193 clients who were selected by random stratified sampling method, were evaluated by a previously designed questionare .
Results: 1. By assessment of 7 variables, it was revealed that 28.86% of manufactured braces, were not adapted with defined fundamentals and biomechanicals.
2. By evaluation of 9 variables, it was made known that 30 % of produced braces was not adapted with established fabricating fundamentals of lower limb braces clinically.
3. By examination of 23 variables revealed that 25.4% of fabricated braces, were observed, had some failures in attention to defined fabricating technical orthopaedic fundamentals.
Conclusion: All the details, fabrication and design procedures should be carefully observed and associated theories should be considered.
