Introduction: The burden of psychiatric disorders in developed countries are identified by screening questionnaires and standard clinical interviews at a high level, but the epidemiological studies of psychiatric disorders in our country are brief and their numbers are few. Planning for providing essential mental health services for the people requires us to be knowledgeable about the present status of psychiatric disorders in the society. Methods : The objective of this research was to carry out an epidemiological study of the psychiatric disorders in individuals aged 18 years and above in urban and rural areas of Yazd province. 419 individuals were selected through randomized systematic and clustered sampling methods from among the existing families of Yazd province and the Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia (SADS) questionnaires were completed by the clinical psychologist. The diagnoses of the disorders were based on DSM-IV classification criteria. Results : The results of the study showed that the prevalence of psychiatric disorders in the province is 15.27 percent. The anxiety and mood disorders with 6.20 and 5.49 percent had the highest prevalence in the province. The prevalence of psychotic disorders in this study was 0.96 percent, neuro-cognitive disorders 2.15 percent and dissociative disorders 0.48 percent. In the group of mood disorders, major depression with 4.77 percent and in the group of anxiety disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder with 1.91 percent had the highest prevalence. This study showed that 10.53 percent of the individuals suffered from at least one of the psychiatric disorders. The prevalence of psychiatric disorders in various groups were as follows: age group 24-40 years 15.60 percent, divorced or separated individuals 66.67 percent, residents of Yazd City 11.79 percent, individuals with primary school education 15 percent, illiterate individuals 11.76 percent and household individuals 15.56 percent .Conclusion : The results of this study are very helpful for health policy makers and programmers in order to prepare and execute plans for betterment of mental health inYazd province.
