Our objective is to develop a fuel for the existing light water reactors (LWRs) that. (a) is less expensive to fabricate than the current uranium-dioxide (UO) fuel: (b) allows longer refueling cycles and higher sustainable plant capacity factors; (c) is very resistant to nuclear weapon-material proliferation: (d) results in a more stable and insoluble waste form: and (e) generates less high level waste. This paper presents the results of our initial investigation of a LWR fuel consisting of mixed thorium dioxide and uranium dioxide (ThO-UO). Our calculations using the SCALE 4.4 and MOCUP code systems indicate that the mixed ThO-UO fuel. with about 6 wt.% of the total heavy metal U-235, could be burned to 72 MW day kg ' (megawatt thermal days per kilogram) using 30 wt.% UO and the balance Th0 The ThO-UO cores can also be burned to about 87 MW day kg ' using 35 wt.% UO and 65% ThO with an initial enrichment of about 7 wt.% of the total heavy metal fissile material. Economic analyses indicate that the ThO-UO fuel will require less separative work and less total heavy metal (thorium and uranium) feedstock. At reasonable future costs for raw materials and separative work. the cost of the ThO-UO fuel is about 9% less than uranium fuel burned to 72 MW day kg  Because ThO-UO fuel will operate somewhat cooler, and retain within the fuel more of the fission products, especially the gasses. ThO-UO fuel can probably be operated successfully to higher burnups than UO fuel. This will allow for longer refueling cycles and better plant capacity factors. The uranium in our calculations remained below 20 wt.% total fissile fraction throughout the cycle, making it unusable for weapons. Total plutonium production per MW day was a factor of 3.2 less in the ThO-UO fuel than in the conventional UO fuel burned to 45 MW day kg . Pu-239 production per MW day was a factor of about 4 less in the ThO-UO fuel than in the conventional fuel. The plutonium produced was high in Pu-238, leading to a decay heat about three times greater than that from plutonium derived from conventional fuel burned to 45 MW day kg and 20 times greater than weapons grade plutonium. This will make fabrication of a weapon more difficult. Spontaneous neutron production from the plutonium in the ThO-UO fuel was about 50% greater than that from conventional fuel and ten times greater than that from weapons grade plutonium. High spontaneous neutron production drastically limits the probable yield of a crude weapon. Because ThO is the highest oxide of thorium while UO can be oxidized further to U,O or UO ThO-UO fuel appears to be a superior waste form if the spent fuel is to be exposed ever to air or oxygenated water.
