All the different kind of mycobacterium speicies except tuberculosis leprae and bovis are considered as environmental mycobacterium which usually can be isolated from sand, water and dusts. In addition to the role of their pathogensis, they can stimulate the immune systems. The imune mechanisms following mycobacterium environmental contamination can be either protect or destroy the immune system when facing the disease related to the mycobacterium. The Golestan province has got two regions from the point of view of T.B cpidcmy,It is higher in the East. The aim of this project is determine the prevalancy of various types and strains of environmental mycobacterium in the East and West of the region. The sampes were collected from both regions from the wet sand, and muddes covered with grass and following their preparation they were cultured on the Lowen Stein Jenson. The total of samples were 220 from these 120 samples were from the region with epidemy of T.B out of these we had 25 samples with positive culture (20.8%) and 47 type of mycobacterium were isolated, the most common forms of them were mycobacterium fortuitum (34%), Mycobacterium flavesens (21.2%), mycobacterium chelonae (12.8%). From 100 samples taken from the region with low epidemy of T.B, 66 smples were with positive cultures (66%) which 114 strains of mycobacterium were diagnosed. The most common forms of these microorganisms were mycobacterium flavesens (20.1%), mycobacterium chelonae (18.4%) and mycobacterium (16.6%). In conclusion in all the Golestan province without taking notice the 1'.B epidemy form 220 samples 91% were positive culture (41.2%) which 161 different strains were diagnosed out of these the most common were ycobacterium foruitum (21.8%) mycobacterium flavesens (20.5%) and mycobacterium chelonae (16.8%). The epidemy and variousity of environmental mycobacterium in the region with low epidemy were much higher than the region with high epidemy and in regard to that these differences are due to the bioenvironmental factors. So therefore this can indicate that the possibility of higher contact between the immune systems and the environmental mycobacterium. These mycobacteriums can act as Booster of BCG vaccine which can continuosly stimulate the immune systems and this can help the body's proper responses when facing with the T.B mycobacerium.
