Introduction & Objective: It is commonly believed that a close relationship is exist between diet, life style and health. Nutritional experts believe that a suitable diet must contain adequate and balanced food and individual changes such as age, sex, place of residency, diet preferences, food habits, culture and nutrients must be considered. Based on these parameters, this study was designed to assess the status of nutritional security in pattern of nutrients intake among families in Boyerahmad township in 1380-81. Materials & Methods: This a descriptive study. Data were collected by interviewing. 420 families were selected using cluster sampling and data regarding one 24-h dietary recall, three times with 10 days interval, were collected in a questionnaire. collected data were analyzed using the third version of nutritional software. Nutrient materials were calculated and daily recommended was calculated for each family and divided by number of persons in each family. Finally mean rate of daily recommended nutrients was measured and was compared with national rates.Results: Results of this study show that carbohydrate, protein and lipid contributed to 78, 11 and 11 percent of energy for each individual respectively. Our finding also indicates that intake of lysine and methionin amino acid multichain saturated amino acids have been in unsecured threshold which means that the intake of these materials have been less than 80% of daily needs in studied families. Conclusion: Results of this study indicate insecurity about some of important nutrients and this is in consistent with other national studies. One of the most important reason for this insufficiently is unsuitable pattern of dietary which is based on using a lot of cereal and less amount of proteins and lipids. This inturn changes the balance of micronutrients in dietary of households which might have consequences such as malnutrition, insufficient growth of children, anemia and vitamin and mineral deficiency. Further investigation in needed to enlight these subjects and also to improve the pattern of dietary in the studied area.
