Extended abstract
1- Introduction
Although in recent years paying attention to sustainable development has increased in Iranian developmental documents, yet a defined and specific framework for assessing and ranking methods and models, especially systematic ordering has not been presented in the country. Social Sustainability means improvement in quality of life and development of human resources, sufficiency of local communities to overcome challenges and internal issues, and respond external changes and management of preservation values. In this sense, social goals of sustainable development such as equal opportunities (inside and intergenerational), empowerment, quality of life improvement, dignity and human rights, poverty alleviation, cultural diversity, social cohesion, social communion, institutional capacity building, social security, responsibility, social welfare and fixation on location have been approved.
This study is based on a new attitude towards sustainable development and attempts to explain and rate the indexes of qualitative and quantitative social sphere dimensions. In this regard, the indexes that explain sustainable development using items that represent those indexes have been identified and then evaluated in Mashhad districts. Afterwards, using experts’ view and network analysis model, weight of indexes were explained in sustainable development in the mentioned districts areas. Finally, mentioned districts were evaluated for having sustainable development indexes.     
2- Theoretical Framework
This study assumes a non-uniform social stability; social stability will increase in the city of Mashhad or around it and it has been done With the aim of understanding and assessing the social sustainability indicators there. To achieve this objective after the identification of indicators and indices that indicate social stability, by the use of the statements that represent each of these indices we tried to measure them in the local areas of Mashhad and discussed them and then by the expert’s ideas and using network analysis model the weight of each index was determined at the explanation of social stability in those areas. Finally desired neighborhoods in terms of social sustainability indicators have been evaluated and to provide solutions to achieve sustainability principles in the studied area are discussed.
3- Methodology
Cochran`s formula was used to determine the number of the target population. Assuming a confidence level of 95% (Z=1.96), (d=0.05), (N=3658), (P=0.5), a sample of 348 households was achieved. Assuming the possibility of some questionnaires being unusable, 360 questionnaires were appropriately allocated between three districts (Daryadel, Goharshad and Shahed). To determine the validity of the questionnaires, the critical comments and suggestions of masters and experts were applied.
To achieve this goal, the Analytic Network Process (ANP) and the Delphi method was used to determine the weight of each social sustainability indicator. The research method in this investigation is descriptive – analytic due to its practical approach and aim. The method of data collection was based on library research and documents and interviews with some experts.
4- Discussion
Since the beginning of the 21st century, paying attention to sustainable development does not only mean considering the environmental and economic dimensions but also social issues. Social stability has received special attention from politicians and planners as an essential component of sustainable development. Since social issues are inevitable in the process of urban planning and urban design as an integral part, affective ways of social issues can be explored and identified by determining the dimensions of social sustainability. In other words, the dimensions of social sustainability can be seen as one of the most important and key tools used in urban planning and policy. Moreover when the extend, complexity and diversity of social sustainability indicators and their role in society in terms of these indicators and performance implications is considered, each has obviously a different value from other indicators.
5- Conclusion and Suggestions
According to the evaluation criteria used for network analysis, we concluded that Equal opportunities (EO =0.136), objective security (OS = 0.129) and social interaction (SI =0.107) respectively have the most weight and are the the most effective in achieving social stability. In the three studied areas, Gohar Shad has the highest level of social sustainability.
Because social issues are inevitable in the process of urban planning and urban design as an integral part, the affective ways of social issues can be explored and identified by determining the dimensions of social sustainability. According to Brandt Land Report, if social sustainability cannot meet the demands so as not to harm the potentials of future generations, to know, it maybe not be imaginable without social variables. For example, if a sense of responsibility, social justice, trust and … is weak in a society, one cannot expect the community to use the resources considering the interests of future generations. It can be said that sustainable development is derived from social sustainability and attention to social issues is a condition which encompasses the different aspects of social sustainability. This means that if social sustainability indicators are acceptable in a society, it is expected that sustainable development in environmental and economical dimensions also exist.


