Palaeomagnetic analysis has been applied worldwide on active faults for decades. The palaeomagnetic investigation on the Sahneh Fault, at ‎middle part of the Zagros Main Recent fault, is the main objective of this research. The length of the Sahneh fault, which is about 100 km in study ‎area, cuts the gabbroic blocks exposed on the both sides with NW-SE trend and connects the Morvarid fault in the NW to the Nahavand fault in ‎the SE of the study area. Tectonically, the mechanism of the Sahneh fault is high angle reverse with dextral strike slip component, and is ‎compatible with the earthquakes focal mechanism solution, movement of the Arabian plate towards the Central Iran and the results of ‎palaeomagnetic data. The paleomagnetic analysis results are based on the drilled oriented samples of 17 selected sites along and on both sides of ‎the Sahneh fault. Nine to eighteen oriented samples were collected from each site. The conducted paleomagnetic analysis includes measurement ‎of NRM, magnetic mineralogy (high temperature), and thermal/ AF demagnetizing. The declination, inclination and ChRM directions of each site ‎separated from the overprint directions by means of the thermal demagnetization method. The mean direction of ChRM and VGP for each site is ‎determined using statistics and palaeomagnetic analysis. For 7 sites the ChRM mean direction is calculated. The obtained mean ChRM directions ‎then compared with the reference palaeomagnetic pole position of the ophioliths of Central Iran, and the sense of rotation were determined for all ‎sites. The dextral strike-slip Movement of the Morvarid and Nahavand faults imposed a compressional and shear stress components on the ‎Sahneh fault, resulted in the formation of transpressional stress regime in the study area. Under this tectonic stress regime, the Riedel of shear ‎systematic fractures may be helpful to interpret the palaeomagnetic data. According to this model, the whole synthetic shear fractures (P, R, D) ‎caused clockwise rotation and the antithetic shear fractures (?) caused counterclockwise rotation in gabbroic blocks.      ‎
