Introduction
Deshpande´ et al. (1993) demand, most eloquently and rhetorically, market orientation for modern organizations at all levels. However, despite the potential value of development and utilization orientation, understanding this concept for many companies is still cheating (McClure, 2010) Yet, studies have shown that organizational conflict can prevent the ability of the market orientation (Lancaster and van der Velden, 2004; Pulendran et al. 2000). In addition, as a result of conflict, organizational culture was studied (Brotheridge and Lee, 2006; Chang et al, 2004). In this study, three types of organizational culture, bureaucratic, innovative and supportive are investigated (Wallach, 1983). Hence, the central question is how research can influence the orientation of the three general organizational cultures and how the culture of an organization can facilitate orientation. Therefore, it is essential that the role of organizational culture and conflict will be analyzed and their impact on market orientation to be measured in the furniture industry. On the one hand, the increasing tendency of people to have the furniture which is on the market has made shopping centers so charming in cities. On the other hand, increase in commodity prices has reduced the purchasing power of people. 


 
Material & Methods
This is a survey study with the following hypotheses: 
Main Hypothesis 1 - The corporate culture has a significant effect on market orientation.
Sub-hypothesis 1-1 - bureaucratic culture has significant effects on market orientation.
Sub-hypothesis 1-2 - Supportive culture has significant effects on market orientation.
Sub-hypothesis 1-3 - creative culture has significant effects on market orientation.
Main Hypothesis 2 - The corporate culture has a significant effect on organizational conflict.
Sub-hypothesis 2-1 - bureaucratic culture has significant effects on organizational conflict.
Sub-hypothesis 2-2 - Supportive culture has significant effects on organizational conflict.
Sub-hypothesis 2-3 - creative culture has significant effects on organizational conflict.
Main Hypothesis 3 - Organizational conflict has significant effects on market orientation.
This method of classification and survey is descriptive. Data from this study was analyzed using spss software and Amos. The population of the research includes people in the furniture industry in the city of Mashhad. Using Cochran formula, a minimum sample of 192 cases was required. Cronbach's alpha was used to assess the reliability of the questionnaire. Overall reliability was calculated and obtained.

Discussion of Results & Conclusions
To analyze the hypothesis of a two-step approach suggested by Anderson and Jerbing (1988), structural equation modeling is used. Firstly, the model can be fitted to measure and confirm the measurement model. In the second step of the analysis, assumptions are tested. The fit criteria are the most important steps in the analysis of structural equation modeling. According to research findings, the fitted values are acceptable; all fit indices show good condition. 
The results showed that the proposed structural model of the main goals of this study was fitted well. Another goal of this research is to provide a conceptual model for the analysis of assumptions as to provide key solutions. One of the purposes of determining the orientation of organizational culture has a significant impact in investigating the first hypothesis. This hypothesis was confirmed with the following three sub-hypothesis. There is no direct link between corporate culture and orientation of its existence. Another objective of the present study was to determine the significant impact of organizational culture on organizational conflicts that was shown in the second hypothesis. This hypothesis was confirmed. In fact, we can say that organizational culture can serve as a powerful resource for increasing the competitive position of the organization. Ultimately, the goal of the present study was to investigate the effect of organizational conflict as a mediator variable in the relationship between organizational culture and marker orientation. The analysis was performed using the indicated Organizational conflict as a mediator and it can tell how significant the role of organizational culture on market orientation is.

