Introduction
Agnew general strain theory is one of the best known theories of criminology. The popularity of this theory is derived from its scope and breadth which allows researchers to investigate about the effects of a variety of structural and psychological stressors on a range of useful deleterious outcomes. Although this Theory have been developed and tested to explain crime, it can also be applied to explain analogous behavior such as substance use, deviant behaviors and suicide. The main objective of this study is sociological explanation suicidality among students of Mazandaran University. Accordingly, the main research question was: how suicidality can be explained among students on the basis of Agnew general strain theory. Suicide is one of the problems of present era and structural change and be younger of young people who attempt to suicide also has increased the importance of this issue. Suicide has been described as the endpoint of a continuum that begins with suicide ideation (consideration of suicide), followed by planning and preparing for suicide and finally by threating, attempting and completing suicide. Based on available statistics and researches abroad, suicide is third leading cause death in age group 15-24 years, and is second leading cause of death among college students. According to a study in the United States (2001), in the period 1999 to 2000, 9.5% of students reported that they had seriously considered attempting suicide and 1.5% of students reported that they had attempted suicide within the last school year. In Iran also accordance with the statistics office of the ministry of consultation, research and technology, between the years 1998 to 2004, 292 suicides were reported among students, which 25 cases (8/6 percent) suicide has been completed. Also Panaghi and others demonstrated during years 2006-2008, 230 suicides have occurred among students that based on maximum rate of student suicide in Iran is 3 per 100000 people. So we can say that students as young people in society are vulnerable to suicide. So, purpose of this study is that a range of stressors will explain from Agnew’s general strain theory perspective in related to suicidality among boy and girl students of Mazandaran University. Studies show that within country no research has been conducted to examine suicide among students from Agnew’s general strain theory. Therefore, Performance this study not only the evaluation or empirical validation of this theory but can also better identify the causes and influencing factors on suicide and provide effective solutions based on Agnew’s general strain  theory. Examination studies show that few of the research were to investigate suicide among students, and little were studied suicidality in this population groups. Also, few studies have been conducted in the area of suicide among students from a sociological perspective studied this phenomenon.  In addition, a review of research conducted within the country, we can say that it looks no research as an explanatory model for suicide has not been tested Agnew's general strain theory. Major internal investigation carried out in this field, from the perspective of psychology and medicine. The lack of a theoretical framework and methodological weaknesses Instances many of studies within the country is on suicide.  And most studies in this area have focused on specific aspects of this theory and research population none of them have been students. So, instead of a sociological research that all source Agnew’s general strain theory to explain suicide and the students will be examined in this investigation is empty. Which in this study, it is discussed. Among the various theories that explain the deviant behavior Agnew’s general strain theory is used as a theoretical framework.

 
Materials and Methods
Research method is surveys and data collection was questionnaire. The research population consisted of all students enrolled at the Mazandaran University in the academic year 2011-2012 are which in total 438 of them were selected by random stratified sampling. Data were analyzed using SPSS software and was performed by the multiple regression analysis compulsive. To examine the validity of the questionnaire the face validity and content validity were used. To determine the reliability of this study, the Cronbach's alpha coefficient was used. In this study, dependent variable is suicidality and independent variables include relational strain, status strain, and removal of positive stimuli and Exposure to negative stimuli. 

Discussion of Result and Conclusions
This study effect of several variables from the Agnew’s general strain theory in relation to suicidality examined. The results suggest that general strain theory somewhat have been effective in explaining students suicidality and can provide a theoretical model for studying suicide. The result of study shows that there are direct and significant relationships between removal of positive stimuli with suicidality.  Accordingly, with increase removal of positive stimuli for individuals, Rate suicidality also increases. Hence, when a person tries to deal with the removal of positive stimuli, or to seek revenge on the people who are motivated to make positive or when he was trying to replace it with an illegitimate and illegal means, it is possible to engage in deviant behaviors such as suicide. The results suggest students with status strain are more likely to have suicidality. Status strains in the present study have two dimensions of interpersonal status and university engagement that findings of this study, the relationship between status strain with suicidality is approved. The result also show students with relational strain are more likely to have suicidality., The person exposed to more negative relationships with others, will be more likely to suicide. Thus, the findings suggest that a positive relationship with family and peers are an important protective factor against suicidality. Multiple regression analysis result also show that the variables Removal of positive stimulus (beta coefficient=0/147), status strain (beta coefficient=0/140), relational strain (beta coefficient=0/127) are the strongest predictors of suicidality. 

