A simple rigid-plastic homogenization model for the analysis of masonry structures subjected to out-of-plane impact loads is presented. The objective is to propose a model characterized by a few material parameters, numerically inexpensive and very stable. Bricks and mortar joints are assumed rigid perfectly plastic and obeying an associated flow rule. In order to take into account the effect of brickwork texture, out-of-plane anisotropic masonry failure surfaces are obtained by means of a limit analysis approach, in which the unit cell is sub-divided into a fixed number of sub-domains and layers along the thickness. A polynomial representation of micro-stress tensor components is utilized inside each sub-domain, assuring both stress tensor admissibility on a regular grid of points and continuity of the stress vector at the interfaces between contiguous sub-domains. Limited strength (frictional failure with compressive cap and tension cut-off) of brick-mortar interfaces is also considered in the model, thus allowing the reproduction of elementary cell failures due to the possible insufficient resistance of the bond between units and joints.

ular Kirchhoff-Love elements with linear interpolation of the displacement field and constant moment within each element are used at a structural level. In this framework, a simple quadratic programming problem is obtained to analyze entire walls subjected to impacts.

er to test the capabilities of the approach proposed, two examples of technical interest are discussed, namely a running bond masonry wall constrained at three edges and subjected to a point impact load and a masonry square plate constrained at four edges and subjected to a distributed dynamic pressure simulating an air-blast. Only for the first example, numerical and experimental data are available, whereas for the second example insufficient information is at disposal from the literature. Comparisons with standard elastic–plastic procedures conducted by means of commercial FE codes are also provided. Despite the obvious approximations and limitations connected to the utilization of a rigid-plastic model for masonry, the approach proposed seems able to provide results in agreement with alternative expensive numerical elasto-plastic approaches, but requiring only negligible processing time. Therefore, the proposed simple tool can be used (in addition to more sophisticated but expensive non-linear procedures) by practitioners to have a fast estimation of masonry behavior subjected to impact.
