Aim and Background: Blood loss is one of the most critical problems in major surgery. Spinal
surgery usually associated with considerable blood loss and allogenic transfusions. Controlled
hypotension is one of efficient methods for decreasing operative blood loss. The objective of this
study was evaluation of the efficacy of magnesium sulfate in comparison with remifentanil for
induction of relative hypotension in posterior fusion of spine surgery.
Methods and Materials: In this double blind randomized clinical trial, 40 patients with ASA I &
II physical status candidate for lumbar posterior spinal fusion surgery were enrolled and assigned
in two groups (remifentanil and magnesium sulfate) randomly. After the induction of anesthesia
and giving the prone position, relative controlled hypotension was induced for one group with
0.15 ?g/kg remifentanil infusions and in second group with 50 mg/kg loading dose and then 15
mg/kg/hr magnesium sulfate infusion. All other aspects of anesthesia and surgery were similar in
two groups. The target MAP range used in this study was 60-70 mmhg. In the course of surgery
the hemodynamic variables, volume of blood loss, urine output, fluid intake and surgeon’s
satisfaction were recorded. Data was analyzed with SPSS version 13 software and P- value less
than 0.05 was considered meaningful.
Findings: Twenty patients in Mg group and 19 patients in remifentanil group were studied. There
was no statistical difference between two groups according to the hemodynamic variables, volume
of blood loss, urine output, fluid intake and surgeon’s satisfaction (p  >  0.05). The target mean
arterial pressure was achieved in 75% of Mg and 58% of remifentanil groups. Although, the
frequency of TNG consumption was higher (42.1%) in remifentanil group than magnesium sulfate
(25%), but this difference wasn’t statistically significant (p= 0.320).
Conclusions: Our finding showed that in patients undergoing lumbar posterior spinal fusion
surgery, remifentanil and magnesium sulfate has the same hypotensive effect and the volume of
blood loss without any significant side effects.
