The semi-analytical approach to the non-linear dynamic response of beams based on multimode analysis has been presented in Part I of this series of papers (Azrar et al., 1999 Journal of Sound and Vibration224, 183–207 [1]). The mathematical formulation of the problem and single mode analysis have been studied. The objective of this paper is to take advantage of applying this semi-analytical approach to the large amplitude forced vibrations of beams. Various types of excitation forces such as harmonic distributed and concentrated loads are considered. The governing equation of motion is obtained and can be considered as a multi-dimensional form of the Duffing equation. Using the harmonic balance method, the equation of motion is converted into non-linear algebraic form. Techniques of solution based on iterative–incremental procedures are presented. The non-linear frequency and the non-linear modes are determined at large amplitudes of vibration. The basic function contribution coefficients to the displacement response for various beam boundary conditions are calculated. The percentage of participation for each mode in the response is presented in order to appraise the relation to higher modes contributing to the solution. Also, the percentage contributions of the higher modes to the bending moment near to the clamps are given, in order to determine accurately the error introduced in the non-linear bending stress estimated by different approximations. Solutions obtained in the jump phenomena region have been determined by a careful selection of the initial iteration at each frequency. The non-linear deflection shapes in various regions of the solution, the corresponding axial force ratios and the bending moments are presented in order to follow the behaviour of the beam at large vibration amplitudes. The numerical results obtained here for the non-linear forced response are compared with those from the linear theory, with available non-linear results, based on various approaches, and with the single mode analysis.
