Plasma N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) concentrations increase in dogs with azotemia. However, the correlation between glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and NT-proBNP concentrations in dogs has not been evaluated. The objective of this study was to evaluate the correlation between GFR and plasma NT-proBNP concentrations in dogs with chronic kidney disease (CKD). In this retrospective cross-sectional study, plasma creatinine (Cre) and NT-proBNP concentrations, plasma iohexol clearance (PCio) values and blood pressure were measured in dogs with CKD. Dogs were classified according to PCio values into D group (dogs with decreased PCio values), and N group (dogs with normal PCio values). Dogs were further categorized on the basis of their systolic blood pressure and PCio values into NT-D group (normotensive dogs with decreased PCio values), NT-N group (normotensive dogs with normal PCio values), HT-D group (hypertensive dogs with decreased PCio values) and HT-N group (hypertensive dogs with normal PCio values).

icant correlations were observed between plasma NT-proBNP and Cre concentrations (r = 0.360, P &lt; 0.05) and PCio values (r = −0.470, P &lt; 0.01). Plasma NT-proBNP concentrations were significantly higher in the D group than in the N group (P &lt; 0.001). Plasma NT-proBNP concentrations were significantly higher in the HT-D group than in the other three groups (P ⩽ 0.007). No differences in plasma NT-proBNP concentrations were observed between the NT-D and HT-N groups (P = 0.28). Plasma NT-proBNP concentrations were significantly lower in the NT-N group than in the other three groups (P ⩽ 0.043). Our findings suggest that decreased GFR might be associated with increased plasma NT-proBNP concentrations in dogs, similar to that in humans. In addition, the complication of hypertension in CKD might be associated with further increases in plasma NT-proBNP concentrations. In conclusion, the effects of GFR and blood pressure on the plasma NT-proBNP concentration were small, but it could be necessary to consider the effects when this marker is used to evaluate canine cardiac disease.
