Both gamma ray and electron beam irradiation are widely used as a means of medical device sterilisation. However, it is known that the radiation produced by both processes can lead to undesirable changes within biomedical polymers. The main objective of this research was to conduct a comparative study on the two key radiosterilisation methods (gamma ray and electron beam) in order to identify the more detrimental process in terms of the mechanical, structural, chemical and thermal properties of a common biomedical grade polymer. Poly (ether-block-amide) (PEBA) was prepared by injection moulding ASTM testing specimens and these were exposed to an extensive range of irradiation doses (5–200 kGy) in an air atmosphere. The effect of varying the irradiation dose concentration on the resultant PEBA properties was apparent. For instance, the tensile strength, percentage elongation at break and shore D hardness can be increased/decreased by controlling the aforementioned criteria. In addition, it was observed that the stiffness of the material increased with incremental irradiation doses as anticipated. Melt flow index demonstrated a dramatic increase in the melting strength of the material indicating a sharp increase in molecular weight. Conversely, modulated differential scanning calorimetry established that there were no significant alterations to the thermal transitions. Noteworthy trends were observed for the dynamic frequency sweeps of the material, where the crosslink density increased according to an increase in electron beam irradiation dose. Trans-vinylene unsaturations and the carbonyl group concentration increased with an increment in irradiation dose for both processes when observed by FTIR. The relationship between the irradiation dose rate, mechanical properties and the subsequent surface properties of PEBA material is further elucidated throughout this paper. This study revealed that the gamma irradiation process produced more adverse effects in the PEBA material in contrast to the electron beam irradiation process.
