Objective: There have been relatively few quantitative MRI studies of temporal lobe structures and the lateral ventricles in bipolar patients and a lack of agreement across studies as to whether these structures differ significantly in size from control subjects. Also there have been no quantitative MRI studies of bipolar II patients. The present study measured temporal lobe and ventricular structures in both bipolar I and bipolar II patients, as well as control subjects. Method: Twenty-five bipolar I patients, 22 bipolar II patients and 19 control subjects underwent MRI brain scans. The 5 mm coronal slices of each subject were coded and measured by a rater who was blind with respect to subject diagnosis. Volume estimates of the temporal lobe and hippocampus were calculated for each hemisphere by measuring the area of the structure in each slice in which it appears, multiplying by 5 mm and summing. In addition to these volume estimates, the area of the lateral ventricle and the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle, the lateral ventricle to cerebrum area ratio (LV/C) and the temporal lobe to cerebrum area ratio (TL/C), were calculated for each hemisphere in one reference slice only. The area of the third ventricle was also measured. Volume estimates and area ratios were then compared among diagnostic groups. Results: There were no significant differences in temporal lobe or hippocampal volume estimates, in the third ventricle and inferior horn of the lateral ventricle area measurements, and in the TL/C area ratio among diagnostic groups. The lateral ventricle area and LV/C area ratio were significantly larger in bipolar I patients than either bipolar II patients or control subjects only in the left hemisphere. Furthermore, these measures were approximately twice as large in the bipolar I patients as the other groups. Conclusions: The current study adds to a growing literature that bipolar I disorder, particularly in males, may show different neurobiological alterations compared to bipolar II patients or control subjects. The pathophysiologic implications of this accumulating evidence of increased left ventricular size in bipolar I disorder remains to be further elucidated.
