Background
y of life (QOL) has gained increasing attention as an important yet underappreciated component of functional outcome in mood disorders. In particular, the relationship between subjective life satisfaction and objective measures of psychosocial adjustment has not been well-studied. The goal of the present study was to examine the longitudinal associations between subjective life satisfaction and objective functional outcome among individuals with bipolar and unipolar mood disorders.

ndred fifty-seven mood disordered subjects were assessed at index hospitalization for bipolar mania (n = 35), unipolar psychotic depression (n = 27), or unipolar nonpsychotic depression (n = 95). All were prospectively followed up three times, at approximately 2, 4.5 and 7–8 years. Global outcome, work performance, social adjustment, recurrent depressive episodes, and dimensions of life satisfaction were assessed by semi-structured interviews using standardized ratings.
s
tive life satisfaction strongly paralleled global functioning, work performance and social adjustment at each follow-up for patients with unipolar nonpsychotic depression, but not bipolar disorder or unipolar psychotic depression. Depressive symptoms and objective functional impairment contributed to poor QOL in most domains, independent of illness chronicity, medication use, or affective disorder subtype.
tions
gs might have differed had a different QOL measure been used, although the present measure showed concurrent validity with a previously used instrument. Sample sizes for the bipolar and psychotic depression groups were sufficient to detect moderate, but not small, correlations between objective functioning and subjective QOL.
sions
ent depression remains a substantial contributor to poor life satisfaction across affective disorder subtypes. Subjective QOL in bipolar and unipolar psychotic depression patients may not accurately reflect objective functional outcome status, potentially due to diminished insight, demoralization, or altered life expectations over time.
