Objective
sectional and longitudinal studies have suggested that the menopausal transition is a period of vulnerability for the development of depressive symptoms in women. It has been proposed that depression at the time of transition to menopause is part of a distinct diagnostic group of ‘reproductive-related depressive disorders’. Furthermore it is proposed that these disorders are so prevalent that that middle aged women should be routinely screened to improve detection.

ms of this paper were to explore key studies undertaken over the past three decades to examine what evidence exists to support the proposals that depression in midlife women occurs as a biological response to hormonal change and that it is so common that all middle aged women should be routinely screened for depression.

ematic search was carried out of electronic databases for original research using population-based studies examining the relationship between menopause and depression.
s
udinal change in menopausal status over time is associated with an increased risk of elevated depressive symptoms, independent of relevant demographic, psychosocial, behavioural and health factors. However, depressive symptoms have non-specific diagnostic significance, and even when severe do not always reflect a depressive syndrome. There is no clear evidence that depressive disorders occur more commonly in association with the menopause. Rather, it appears that the true rate of disorder is similar to that at other times in a woman's reproductive life.
sions
udies identified here do not provide evidence for the delineation of depression at the menopausal transition as part of a distinctive diagnostic group of ‘reproductive-related depressive disorders’ which occur as a biological response to hormonal change. The most plausible explanation is a bio-psycho-socio-cultural model of the processes which might lead to a depressive disorder in midlife. Although depressive symptoms are common at this time, data do not support the call for screening of all women for depression at the time of the MT. Rather, given the frequency of depression in the general population, clinicians should be alert to the possibility of depression in every clinical encounter.
