Background: Many articles on creativity and innovation begin with a general statement. The companies must be innovative otherwise they will die.
Objective: This study investigated the relationship between organizational trust and organizational creativity in the National Iranian Oil Refining and Distribution Company in Kermanshah.
Methods: This research is descriptive while using survey method; required Data were collected via questionnaire, to measure organizational trust, Alvin and others questionnaire  (2008) were used, and for measuring organizational creativity Randsip questionnaire (1979) was employed. The reliability of organizational trust questionnaire was 0/81 and organizational creativity the reliability was 0/78. The Cronbach alpha of both questionnaires were  more than 0/70, so both questionnaires had enough reliability. Statistical Society included some 300 employees of the National Iranian Oil Refining and Distribution of Kermanshah. Based on a stratified random sampling, some samples were selected from among 148 questionnaires.
Results: To determine the normality of obtained data the  Kolmogorov - Smirnov test was used. The test confirmed that the samples are normal. Hypotheses were tested using Spearman correlation test and the results were positive and significant correlation were observed  between trust and creativity. It means the more employees’ trust to their organization, the more innovative. The results of multiple linear regression showed that only two independent variables, vertical trust and institutional trust are related to the creativity dependent variable. Institutional confidence coefficient equal to 0.79, has the highest proportion of variance in the dependent variable creativity.
Conclusion: Trust is a key element for the success of the organization. The results indicate that low levels of trust in reduced productivity, lack of innovation and creativity. On the other hand, increased levels of confidence in the staff mentality, enhance creativity and innovation and contribute to effective change.

