Evaluation of Accidents and Incidents at Injury Registered in Medical Centers Affiliated to Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences (2012-2013)


Backgrounds and Objective: The purpose of this study is to investigate injuries resulting from accidents and incidents referred to medical centers and hospitals of Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences. 

Materials and Methods: This study is a cross-sectional study. All cases admitted to hospitals' of Deputy of Health of Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, due to accidents and injuries from March 2012 to March 2013 were reviewed. Categorization of accidents and injuries data was performed according to tenth version of international classification of diseases. SPSS V.18 was used for analysis of data. The main variables in this study, the type of incident, type of accident, accident location and background variables that were studied included: gender, age. Data collected by means of forms and software injury register by Hospital emergency department staff to interview and hospital records, were completed.

Results: In total, 248438 cases were reviewed. 67.7% were male and 32.3% were female. Traumas, traffic accidents and falls were major causes of accidents and injuries. Accidents and injuries were more prevalent in 15-25 years age group. Individuals living in urban areas sustained more injuries compared to individuals from rural areas. A total of 722 deaths were reported due to accidents and injuries.

Conclusion: Research results indicate that traffic accidents constitute a large proportion of accident and injuries. Also, men, young people were the most victims of accidents and injuries. Training of different groups, including before and during recruitment, training mothers and elderly it seems to be useful. Further studies on the improvement of accidents and injuries software is suggested for access to complete and reliable data. Promoting Knowledge and training, especially in the younger age group, intervention to resolve the accident prone spots and technical defects is recommended to reduce traffic accidents

Keywords: Accidents, Incidents, Injury Registered, Shahid Beheshti University

