A series of three experiments were conducted to evaluate the performance of the MIRINZ (Meat Industry Research Institute of New Zealand) tenderness probe. In the first experiment, assessments on raw samples from two different muscles (longissimus lumborum and semimembranosus) were obtained using the tension head. Results indicated D50 values (torque at 50° of rotation) were the most highly related to both sensory (taste, olfactory, and feeling factors measured by a trained sensory panel) and consumer (hedonic ratings provided by untrained consumers) properties and were the values of choice, since all probe values were essentially measuring the same characteristics. In the second experiment, assessments were made using both the tension and shear heads on raw and cooked striploin (longissimus lumborum) steaks. Results confirmed probe values were essentially measuring the same characteristics, but indicated raw tension head, area 2 values (area before 50° of rotation) were more highly related to both sensory and consumer properties than were D50 values. However, probe values from raw samples did not account for a sufficient amount of variation in either sensory or consumer properties to be useful predictors of these traits, and stepwise, linear regression did not improve the predictive value of raw probe values, since all probe values were interrelated. Probe values on cooked samples indicated the shear head and area 3 values (area under the entire trace) were the most related to both sensory and consumer properties and were the values of choice. Based upon the amount of variation accounted for in sensory and consumer traits, probe area 3 values using the shear head on cooked samples provided greater predictive value for both sensory and consumer traits than Warner–Bratzler shear values obtained from steaks cooked either fresh or after being frozen and thawed. In experiment 3, correlations with individual, parametric character notes from the texture profiles of two different muscles provided no clear indication as to the textural properties being assessed by the probe. However, the MIRINZ probe appears to be a quick viable alternative to the Warner–Bratzler shear for providing an objective measure of cooked meat tenderness.
