Objective: Approximately 15-20% of clinically recognizable pregnancies end in spontaneous
abortion. The incidence of chromosomal abnormalities in those abortions is as high as 50%.A
modest but clinically important proportion of spontaneous abortions is caused by a balanced
chromosomal aberration in one of the parents. This results from the production of gametes
and embryos with unbalanced chromosome sets. The clinical consequences of such abnormal
gametes include sterility, recurrent abortions, and giving birth to malformed children. Until
now, no such studies have been done in Khozestan province. Therefore, the purpose of this
study was to evaluate the frequency and nature of chromosomal abnormalities that lead to
recurrent abortions in Khozestan province, which should help physicians working in the
region to realize the contribution of chromosomal abnormalities to cases of repeated fetal
loss. Also it compares our region to other countries and research centers. This research study
evaluated 142 cases with repeated abortion during 1-year period of the study. Methods and
Materials and methods: For routine cytogenetic analysis, 3 ml of peripheral blood was
incubated in complete lymphocyte culture medium and colchicine was added at prophase
stage for fixing chromosomes. Then, they were categorized by G-banding method.
Results: A total of 116 cases with a history of recurrent abortions were examined in this
research study. The age of the referred women ranged from 20 to 43 years with an average
of 28 years (SD = 4.75). Meanwhile, the age of referred men ranged from 22 to 44 years and
with an average of 32.8 years (SD = 4.86). The number of previous abortions varied from 2
to 5 abortions (an average of 2.82 abortions per case).
In addition, 8 females (12.7%) and 6 males (11.3%) were found to have abnormal karyotypes.
These abnormalities were four balanced translocations, one deletion, one inversion and eight
mosaic condition. Among cases with abnormal karyotype, the average of maternal age was
29 years (SD = 3.25). Meanwhile, the average number of abortions for cases with abnormal
karyotype was 3.07 (SD = 0.83).
Conclusion: The correlation for maternal age and chromosomal abnormality was P=0.083
and for the number of abortions and chromosomal abnormality was P=0.107.
