The objective of this study is to understand the calcareous nannoplankton response to past environmental
changes in the Strait of Hormuz during the Holocene. Calcareous nannoplankton is well abundant in the
living phytoplankton community and a key component of the marine sediments. Due to its distinct
reaction to environment changes and its good preservation potential, it is well suited for
paleoceanographic reconstructions. Therefore, the study of the calcareous nannoplankton is indicative for
paleoceanographic changes in the Strait of Hormuz. For this purpose, 15 samples of surface sediments of
the Strait of Hormuz are selected and 27 species and 16 genera are introduced. In this study, we have
observed 3 groups of calcareous nannofossils. These groups included abundant taxa, rare taxa and
reworked taxa. We study all samples of the Strait of Hormuz for detecting the total organic carbon content.
They have shown that there is a relationship between TOC, CaCO3 and productivity of calcareous
nannofossils. Some samples include high TOC and CaCO3 values and they are correlated to high
productivity of calcareous nannofossils. Also due to dilution, some samples showed a negative
relationship between TOC and CaCO3. Some specific element compositions of this region were analysed
and then we studied the relationship between them and relative abundances of calcareous nannofossils.
Some elements like Ba, Cu and Zn reveal a close relationship to fertility of calcareous nannofossils and
they are highly enriched in the nutrient-rich waters of strait of Hormuz. Ba, Cu and Zn content and relative
abundances of nannofossils were high in the near shore of Strait of Hormuz. The distribution pattern of the
Si content shows a persistent minimum in this area. This element have shown a negative relation to
productivity of calcareous nannofossils. Relying on information, we can conclude the coast of Strait of
Hormuz is affected by upwelling and it is an appropriated environmental aspect of nutrients and
productivity.
