Background and objective: Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) is the most prevalent cause
of children renal insufficiency which in many cases (90%) occurs following diarrhea. Hemolytic
microangiopathic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and renal insufficiency are main symptoms of
hemolytic uremic syndrome. This study aims to consider the relationship between pathologic data
of nephro-biopsy and laboratory data of children suffering from the disease.
Material and Methods: This study has been carried out in retrospective, cross-sectional and
descriptive procedures. For this purpose, 28 patients with an average age of 6 years suffering from
uremic hemolytic syndrome referred to Ali Asghar Hospital over the last 10 years. Light microscopic
data of glomeruli, arterioles, arteries, interstitial tissue, medullary vessels and tubules were
evaluated. Laboratory data including hematology, biochemistry, and urinary tests were extracted
from patients’ files. Data were analyzed using SPSS software.
Results: The most prevalent damages in glomeruli were decreased capillary lumen and thickening
of its wall and in arterioles were mild decrease of lumen and in artery thickening of intima and mild
infiltration of inflammatory cells and mild edema in interstitial and hyperemia in vaso recta and
the most prevalent pathology in tubules was the existence of cast. Significant relationship was found
out between time of recovery of hematological disorders and medullary vessels congestion and reduplication
of arterial inner elastic lamina and also improvement of biochemistry changes with
glomerulus necrosis and leucocytes assembly in vaso recta. Arteriolar rate with creatinine serum
level at discharge time was related and tubular rate with platelet count at discharging time was also
related.
Conclusion: Biopsy is an important tool for prognosis and determination of disease intensity.
There was valuable statistical relationship between some laboratory data at the time of referral and
pathological data which even could influence intensity or prognosis of disease.
