
A Study of Learner Errors in the Translation of the Adverbial Function “ke” in Arabic
Mansoureh Zarkoob  
Manizheh Yuhannaie 
Leila Raiesi 
Abstract                                                                                                                                  Received:   2010.10.18
                                                                                                                                                   Accepted: 2012.04.29


'ke' has various types and different meanings in Persian of which many Arabic students have not enough knowledge and mostly encounter some problems when they are translating it into Arabic. Hence, it is important to recognize errors and minimize them. Among the most applicable uses of this word and its combinations is its adverbial function in sentences. There are different equivalents for this kind of 'ke' in Arabic which students do not recognize. This article studies and analyzes errors in translation of adverbial 'ke' and the words resulting from it. Since, students pass various courses such as grammar, composition, dialogue, translation, … up to the end of their education in BA degree, the effect of Arabic teaching procedure in the number of student error frequency is studied. So, in order to explicate the effect of teaching (academic progress of students) on correct translation, regarding various applications of ' ke' word in Persian and their different equivalents in Arabic, forty sentences were given to 110 Esfahan University students in terms 3, 5, 7 in order to be translated into Arabic. We, explained  and analyzed the errors through descriptive-analytic statistics and by SPSS software and investigated  reasons for and consequences of these errors. It should be noted that student errors in case of various types of 'ke' –relative, subjective, objective, … have been taken into consideration . Most of the errors are related to adverbial subordinate sentences and also discussing various types of 'ke' is not the scope of  this( we have considered only adverbial sentences).      

  Keywords:  'ke', translation, finding equivalents, teaching, errors






