The objective of this study was to determine the effects of grain compared to spineless cactus feeding on goat kids growth, carcass characteristics and FA profile. For this purpose, 21 kids were used and allocated to 3 groups receiving a low quantity (200 g) of oat hay. The control group received ad libitum a concentrate containing 130 g crude protein (CP) per kg of dry matter (C130). The second group received half of that contained consumed by the control one but its CP content was 260 g/kg DM and spineless cactus ad libitum (C260-Cac). In the third group, concentrate intake was limited to soya bean at a quantity that provided the same CP quantity as the two other groups and also cached spineless cactus was distributed ad libitum (Soya-Cac). Animals of all groups had free access to water. At the end of the growth trial which lasted for 74 days, all kids were slaughtered. Samples of longissimus dorsi muscle were used for meat quality and FA composition study.

s in the control group and those in the C260-Cac had higher growth rate than Soya-Cac diet animals. Muscle and adipose tissue mean weights were higher in the first groups while the bone weight was similar in all treatments. Animals given Soya-Cac diet had relatively less fat (10.5%) than those fed other diets (p &lt; 0.001). Carcass fat content tended to be lower (p = 0.07) in C260-Cac goats (13.5%) than in those of the C130 group (15.8%). The ultimate pH ranged between 6.18 and 6.48; it was higher in meat from control goats (C130) than in animals receiving cactus. Dietary treatment had no significant effect (p &gt; 0.05) on meat moisture, ash, crude fat and protein contents. The intra muscular lipid composition in fatty acids showed differences between the control group and those receiving cactus. Cactus in the diet was associated with more C18:2 and conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) as well as a higher proportion of PUFA and PUFA:SFA ratio than control ones. In conclusion, this study showed that cactus feeding of goat kids maximises the proportion of CLA, PUFA and PUFA:SFA ratio.
