The accurate simulation of polydisperse sprays undergoing coalescence in unsteady gaseous flows is a crucial issue. In solid rocket motors, the internal flow depends strongly on the alumina droplet size distribution, which spreads up with coalescence. Yet solving for unsteady two-phase flows with high accuracy on the droplet sizes is a challenge for both modeling and scientific computing. As an alternative to Lagrangian approaches, a wide range of Eulerian models have been recently developed to describe the disperse liquid phase at a lower cost, with an easier coupling to the gaseous phase and with massively parallel codes. Among these models, the multi-fluid model allows the detailed description of polydispersity and size/velocity correlations by separately solving fluids of size-sorted droplets, the so-called sections. The existing one size moment method, which describes the size distribution with one size moment per section, provides simple and fast resolution for coalescence. On the other hand, a two size moment method has been suggested to reduce the number of sections but it lacks an efficient coalescence resolution method. After introducing a new strategy for two size moment coalescence, the two methods are compared on various configurations in a research code and an industrial-oriented code, in order to conclude on computational accuracy and cost. Then the paper aims at describing the most efficient approach for multi-dimensional unsteady and eventually coalescing rocket chamber simulations. Its objective is threefold: first, to validate the two size moment method by comparing simulations to reference solutions and dedicated experimental measurements conducted at ONERA, second to study the efficiency and robustness of both methods, third, to draw some firm conclusions about the necessity to use the one size moment or two size moment method to simulate solid propellant alumina sprays. We finally perform the first simulations of coalescence in realistic 2D boosters with the two size moment method, implemented in the industrial-oriented code CEDRE.
