The objective was to determine the effect of pre-slaughter growth rate on feed efficiency, components of body growth and on the tenderness of longissimus muscle from steers reared to a common age and carcass weight. Sixty Friesian steers were group-housed and offered grass silage ad libitum and 3.5 kg concentrates per animal daily for 5 months and then 5 kg concentrates and 1 kg grass hay for 1 month before the experiment began. The animals were then weighed and in a randomised block were assigned to one of 5 groups, for slaughter at the beginning of the experiment or to be offered concentrates and hay (900 and 100 g/kg total diet, respectively) to achieve target growths of: 0.72 kg/day continuously for 17 weeks, 0.36 kg/day for the first 8 weeks and 1.08 kg/day for the final 8 weeks (low–high), 1.08 kg/day for the first 8 weeks and 0.36 for the final 8 weeks (high–low) or 0.36 kg/day for the first 2 weeks, 0.72 kg/day during weeks 4 and 14 and 1.08 kg/day for the final 2 weeks (pulse). One week was allowed for transition to the different dietary allowances within each energy supply pattern. The mean age at the beginning and end of the study was 18 and 22.5 months, respectively. After slaughter, the weight of the carcass and kidney + channel fat depot were recorded, the pistola hind quarter was dissected into fat, lean and bone and the tenderness of the m. longissimus thoracis et lumborum (LTM) muscle was measured instrumentally and using a trained taste panel after 2, 7 or 14 days ageing. The pattern of energy supply did not affect carcass weight, fat score or kidney + channel fat weight. The pistola hind quarter from animals offered the low–high energy pattern had a similar composition to the continuously-fed animals but contained more muscle than that from animals offered high–low or pulse energy patterns. After 14 days ageing, LTM from the continuously-fed animals was more tender than that from animals offered the other energy supply patterns but shear force did not differ between supply patterns. The data do not support the hypothesis that pre-slaughter growth rate increases tenderness but suggest that energy supply pattern can influence body composition of finishing cattle.
