Landscape visual quality is one of the most important national resources, cultural and natural heritage which admired its beauty. Visual characterization of landscape has an important role in identity of the region and sense of the place and makes the individuals to enjoy from natural and manufactured environment. It is able to attract investment and help to economic and cultural promotion of the regions too. Nowadays Land use planners in very countries have recognized the necessity of more consideration to aesthetic values. So recognition of effective component on landscape visual quality as an appropriate implement for evaluating and site selecting of the regions which has the aesthetic value, can help to managers and planners in the effective management of valuable landscapes. Ziarat watershed of Golestan province due to its aesthetics’ endowments has become one the ecotourism poles of the province. The aim of this study is to determine the most important subjective and objective criteria which are effective on landscape visual quality assessment of Ziarat watershed. To achieving this aim Principal Component Analysis method was used beside questionaries’ survey. Finally the results showed that from the 15 subjective criteria which were used in this study 5 criteria including: complexity, diversity of colors, front view landscapes of the visitors, cleanness of the environment and texture and from the 8 subjective criteria, 3 criteria including diversity of vegetation density, waterfall viewshed and diverse point viewshed had the most importance. Due to the capability of decreasing data’s dimensions and flexibility of PCA method, this method would have had a widespread usage in environmental sciences. We can use this method in different places according to the specific environmental situation of the region and extract more important effective criteria. Using the results of this study made it possible to form questionnaires with fewer questions, so the managers of tourist areas can reach to the perception of visual quality of the desired area by spending less time and cost.
