No-tillage in association with row crop production is generally believed to be poorly adapted to fine-textured soils, especially in temperate humid climates. The relative success of conservation tillage may be impacted by changes in soil structure. The objective of this study is to evaluate the performance of reduced tillage systems after rotation from a perennial sod crop. An experiment involving spring and fall moldboard plow till (PT), no-till (NT)/zone till (ZT), and ridge till (RT) under maize (Zea mays L.) production following alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.) was conducted on a Kingsbury clay loam soil (Gleyic Luvisol) in Northern New York. Soil water content, strength and temperature, plant height, leaf area and number, leaf, stem and root biomass, and root distribution were measured during the 1992 and 1993 growing seasons for spring PT and NT, while from 1994 to 1999 only yield measurements were made. Tillage in 1992 occurred under adequately dry conditions, but in 1993 under partially plastic consistency state, resulting in an underconsolidated plow layer. Soil water contents were generally higher for NT than PT in 1992, but equal in 1993. Root proliferation was good in the subsoil although soil strengths were generally above the 2 MPa level, suggesting that penetrometer measurements are not a good indicator of rooting potential in a well-structured soil. Soil strength was higher in both years under NT, and under both tillage treatments was negatively related to soil water content, except in the surface layer where soil penetrability appears mostly affected by aggregate arrangement. NT recorded higher plant heights, leaf area index and leaf numbers in 1993, while PT recorded higher per plant leaf area, stem and root biomass. Roots were generally more abundant under PT than NT at all depths, and were reduced in trafficked inter-row areas. Maize yield was significantly higher under PT in 1992, but similar to NT in 1993. Further yield data from 1994 to 1999 indicate that reduced tillage systems can perform equally or better compared to fall PT on this soil type. Spring PT generally yields lower than fall PT, NT/ZT, and RT. In general, long-term use of reduced tillage systems is economical on well-structured clay loam soils if adequate consideration is given to maintaining soil structure.
