Parent material and pumiceous alluvial soils, located in a tropical region of Mexico, were studied to supply information on soil suitability for agricultural production in the context of sustainable agriculture. In recent alluvial soils, an understanding of how soil characteristics vary with parent material and topography provides a basis for determining land utilization type, land suitability as well as land quality. The main objective of this study was to establish the relationship of soil properties to parent material in west Nayarit, Mexico. Field studies were initiated in 1993 by a request for technical assistance from the Comision Federal de Electricidad. The studied soils were derived from pumice that has been reworked and mixed with detrital material from other sources. We found that such soils have unique physical, chemical and mineralogical characteristics that are rarely found in soils derived from other parent materials. Data for two selected alluvial soil profiles are presented. These soils were developed on Holocene volcanogenic pumiceous alluvial river terraces and river floodplains, under current udic-isohyperthermic soil-climate conditions. The agronomic properties, tillage influences and fertilizer requirements of these soils have been studied extensively. To maximize their productivity and minimize deterioration, proper management must be based on an understanding of the unique physical, chemical and mineralogical properties. Results indicate that such soils have physical properties that provide a good environment for deep rooting and can supply the water necessary for vigorous plant growth. In both soils, water retention at 33 and 1500 kPa, particle surface area, calculated clay, cation exchange capacity, Al exchangeable percentage and P retention, and the occurrence of isotropic coatings on rock fragments and peds tend to increase in the presence of the large amounts of hydrolyzed pumice that are found in the 0.02–2.0 mm fraction. Scanning electron microscope–energy dispersive X-ray analyses demonstrate that the coatings dominantly consist of noncrystalline material, probably allophanic-like material as suggested by the Si/Al molar ratio of 1.0. Selective dissolution analysis reveals that these abundant noncrystalline materials consist of ferrihydrite and allophane with an atomic ratio (Alo−Alp)/Sio of approximately 1.4. Both ferrihydrite and allophane have very large specific surface area and absorptive capacity that make a significant contribution to the overall properties of these soils. X-ray diffraction analysis and transmission electron microscope observation show that the major group of crystalline clay minerals in the upper section of studied soils are tubular and spheroidal halloysite. These soils were classified as Vitrandic Udifluvents according to Soil Taxonomy.
