The earliness is of great importance to cotton production in Mediterranean-type environments due to detrimental effects of autumn rainfall on lint quality. However, farmers commonly avoid early sowing due to risks of cold soil temperature and waterlogging after sowing in spring. Ridge-tillage system is one approach to increase soil temperature and mitigate adverse effects of waterlogging. The ridge-tillage system is also advantageous in reducing inputs in tillage operations. However, a limited experimental data are available about the effects of ridge-tillage system on earliness of harvesting, lint yield and quality of cotton in the Mediterranean-type environments. Thus, the objective of this study was to determine how ridge-tillage (RT)-planting system and intra-row spacing affect cotton lint yield, earliness and fiber quality compared with conventional tillage (CT)-planting system. Field experiments were conducted on a clay soil (Vertisol) in Hatay province (36°39′N–36°40′E, 83 m a.s.l.) in the Eastern Mediterranean Region of Turkey during 2000 and 2001. The experiment was laid out as a split-plot with three replications with tillage systems as main plots and intra-row spacings (13, 17, 21 and 25 cm) as subplots. The effects of tillage systems on lint yield and earliness were inconsistent among years. The RT-planting system resulted in 13.5% higher lint yield and 14.5% more earliness in 2001 when abundant rainfall occurred after sowing, while significant effects of tillage systems were not observed in 2000. The intra-row spacings significantly affected lint yield and earliness in both years. The earliness increased with closer spacing, while the highest lint yield was obtained from 17 cm intra-row spacing in both years. However, the fiber quality parameters were not significantly affected by tillage systems, intra-row spacings and tillage system × spacing interaction in both years. Finally, the results suggest that RT-planting system with 17 cm intra-row spacing can be used in cotton production instead of CT-planting system in the Eastern Mediterranean Region of Turkey. Ridging in 17 cm intra-row spacing also seems to be suitable to mechanical harvesting.
