Reduced tillage systems may be an option to allow rapid crop establishment in areas constrained by a short growing season, but such methods need to be adapted to soil tillage requirement and crop establishment needs. Rotation and tillage studies were conducted during a 6-year period on a fine sandy loam (Podzol) with silage maize (Zea mays L.) under the cool, humid climate, and relatively short growing season of Prince Edward Island, Atlantic Canada. The objective was to compare a continuous maize rotation with a maize–barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) rotation, using both no-tillage and conventional mouldboard ploughing for the maize, and to evaluate treatment effects on maize growth and productivity, weed populations, and soil quality. Plant population and maize yield were not consistently influenced by the tillage or rotation treatments. Mean maize yield ranged from 7.2 to 7.7 Mg ha−1. An increasing density of weeds over the 6-year period, especially perennial species, was evident under no-tillage, compared to mouldboard ploughing. Except for slight changes in soil pH, spatial variation in extractable soil P, and a higher level of organic C and labile forms of C (microbial biomass and mineralizable C), soil chemical quality was similar among treatments. An apparent decline in soil physical quality, as indicated by a reduction in macro-porosity volume and increase in soil penetration resistance below the 8 cm soil depth, was evident under the no-tillage at the end of the 6-year period. However, macro-pore continuity was less affected by a reduction in tillage, while field measurements of soil hydraulic conductivity increased under no-tillage compared to ploughing. The latter result may be related to the observed increase in earthworm population where tillage was reduced. Use of rotational tillage resulted in an intermediate soil physical condition between continuous no-tillage and ploughing. Overall, no-tillage appears a promising strategy to facilitate a fast and early establishment of maize on sandy loam soils in Atlantic Canada, but some ongoing monitoring of the soil physical condition would be required.
