Recent research has indicated that conservation systems with narrow-rows have potential for higher crop productivity on southeastern USA Coastal Plains Soil. The objective of this study was to determine how surface tillage and subsoiling affect nutrient distribution in the soil profile in narrow- and wide-row systems. A secondary objective was to determine the effect of row position on soil pH and nutrient concentrations in the wide-row system. Soil samples were collected in 1996 from plots that had been growing soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merr.) double cropped with wheat (Tritiucum aestivum L.) for 3 years and then again in 1999 after 3 years of continuous corn (Zea mays L.). Narrow-row spacing was 19 cm for soybean and 38 cm for corn. Wide-row spacing was 76 cm for both soybean and corn. Wheat was grown in 19 cm wide-rows. Soil samples were randomly collected from throughout the plots in the narrow-row culture. In the wide-row culture, separate samples were collected from the row and from between rows. Treatments were surface tillage (disc tillage (DT) and no surface tillage (NT)), with different frequencies of subsoiling. The soil type was Goldsboro loamy sand (fine-loamy, siliceous, thermic, Aquic Kandiudult). Soil samples from four depths (the surface 5 cm of the A horizon, the remainder of the A horizon, the E horizon, and the top 7.5 cm of the B horizon) were analyzed for pH, P, K, Ca, and Mg. Nutrient concentrations and pH differed little between row spacings at any depth after either 3 or 6 years. Differences due to subsoiling appeared mainly due to nutrient removal as the treatments with more intense subsoiling had higher yield and lower concentrations of nutrients (except K). Concentrations of P, Mg, and Ca at the soil surface tended to be higher in NT than in DT, especially in the mid-rows of the 76 cm wide-row systems. The data suggest only small differences in soil nutrient stratification can be expected as growers adopt narrow-row crop production systems with intensive subsoiling.
