As construction and open-cast mining activities continue to expand on fertile agricultural land, the removal and subsequent restoration of soil to be re-used for plant growth has become an increasingly important issue in soil protection. A key factor for the success of soil restoration is that the soil is allowed to develop sufficient mechanical strength to withstand the stresses involved in the intended type of land use. The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of the first use of heavy agricultural machinery on the physical and mechanical properties of a restored soil after the period of restricted cultivation (as prescribed by current guidelines), when the soil is re-submitted to normal agricultural management. We performed two traffic experiments on a soil which had been restored according to current guidelines 4 years before the beginning of the study. In the first year of the study, a combine harvester passed two times across the wetted experimental area, and in the following year 10 times. Two passes along the same tracks caused only weak compaction effects, mainly reducing coarse porosity. In contrast, after 10 passes, deep ruts had formed, and coarse porosity was drastically reduced down to the subsoil. Confined uniaxial compression tests revealed an increase in precompression stress and a decrease in the slope of the virgin compression line, i.e. the compression index, after 10 passes. However, precompression stress was still much lower than the exerted soil stresses at the corresponding soil depths, indicating that due to the short duration of the wheel loadings equilibrium conditions were not reached in the traffic experiments and that further compaction would have occurred with additional passes. The decrease in compression index found after 10 passes may be due to the practice that samples are pre-conditioned to a specified water tension for the oedometer tests. The results show that loads may exceed precompression stress for short durations even in a restored soil which is still far from having re-gained normal strength without serious damage. Thus, the use of precompression stress as a criterion for traffickability was on the safe side in preventing damage to the ecological quality of the soil by compaction, even if the concept did not fully apply to the field reality of the mechanical stress conditions.
