Soil tillage and its interaction with climate change are widely discussed as a measure fostering carbon sequestration. To determine possible carbon sinks in agriculture, it is necessary to study carbon sequestration potentials in relation to agricultural management. The aim of this paper is to evaluate the soil carbon sequestration potential of a site in north-eastern Switzerland under different tillage systems. The study was performed as a long-term (19-year) trial on an Orthic Luvisol (sandy loam) with a mean annual air temperature of 8.4 °C and a long-term precipitation mean of 1183 mm. The soil organic carbon (SOC) concentration was determined five times during the study period, with the paper focussing mainly on the year 2006.

in objective was to quantify the influence of mouldboard ploughing (PL), shallow tillage (ST), no-tillage (NT) practices, and grassland (GL) on soil organic carbon content, the latter's different fractions (labile, intermediate, and stable), and its distribution by depth. In calculating the SOC content of the whole soil profile, we included a correction factor accounting for variations in bulk density (equivalent soil mass).

tal SOC stock at a depth of 0–40 cm was 65 Mg C ha−1, and although higher under GL, did not differ significantly between PL, ST, and NT. SOC concentrations per soil layer were significantly greater for NT and ST (0–10 cm) than for PL, which had greater SOC concentrations than NT and ST at 20–30 cm depth. Both SOC concentrations and stocks (0–20 cm) were largest under GL. In all treatments, most of the carbon was found in the intermediate carbon fraction. There was no significant difference in any of the three SOC fractions between NT and ST, although there was between ST and PL.

p decrease in C-concentrations was observed in the first 7 years after the transition from grassland to arable land, with a new equilibrium of the carbon concentration in the 0–40 cm layer being reached 12 years later, with no significant difference between the tillage treatments.

l, the results indicate that effects of tillage on soil carbon are small in moist, cold-temperate soils, challenging conversion into no-till as a measure for sequestering C.
