Changes in land use can result in either sources or sinks of atmospheric carbon (C), depending on management practices. In Brazil, significant changes in land use result from the conversion of native vegetation to pasture and agriculture, conversion of pasture to agriculture and, more recently, the conversion of pasture and agriculture to integrated crop-livestock systems (ICL). The ICL system proposes a diversity of activities that include the strategic incorporation of pastures to agriculture so as to benefit both. In agricultural areas, for example, the implementation of ICL requires the production of quality forage for animals between crops as well as the production of straw to facilitate the sustainability of the no-tillage (NT) management system. The objective of this study was to evaluate the modifications in soil C stocks resulting from the main processes involved in the changes of land use in Amazonia and Cerrado biomes. For comparison purposes, areas under native vegetation, pastures, crop succession and ICL under different edapho-climatic conditions in Amazonia and Cerrado biomes were evaluated. This study demonstrated that the conversion of native vegetation to pasture can cause the soil to function either as a source or a sink of atmospheric CO2, depending on the land management applied. Non-degraded pasture under fertile soil showed a mean accumulation rate of 0.46 g ha−1 year−1. Carbon losses from pastures implemented in naturally low fertile soil ranged from 0.15 to 1.53 Mg ha−1 year−1, respectively, for non-degraded and degraded pasture. The conversion of native vegetation to agriculture in areas under the ICL system, even when cultivated under NT, resulted in C losses of 1.31 in six years and of 0.69 Mg ha−1 in 21 years. The conversion of a non-degraded pasture to cropland (soybean/sorghum) released, in average, 1.44 Mg of C ha−1year−1to the atmosphere.

L system in agricultural areas has shown evidences that it always functions as a sink of C with accumulation rates ranging from 0.82 to 2.58 Mg ha−1 year−1. The ICL produces soil C accumulation and, as a consequence, reduces atmospheric CO2 in areas formerly cultivated under crop succession. However, the magnitude of C accumulation in soil depends on factors such as the types of crops, the edapho-climatic conditions and the amount of time the area is under ICL.
