Introduction: After caesarean, mothers need to take care of their babies as soon as possible, and pain relief in them leads to more comfort and faster recovery and it reduces hospitalization time and complications such as pulmonary thromboembolism as well as treatment costs. 
Objective: Determining the effect of TAP block by injection of Bupivacaine 0.25% after caesarean section on post operative pain.
Materials and Methods: This study was performed on seventy six women that underwent elective caesarean section. Then, the women were randomly divided into two groups. Six women were excluded from the study which was a double-blind clinical trial.
In the case group: 20cc of Bupivacaine 0.25% was injected between transverse abdominal muscle fascia and internal oblique muscle fascia, and in control group the same amount of normal saline was used. Pain intensity was measured by VAS score at 2,4,6,12,24,48 hours after surgery. In both groups, if the patient needed pain relief ,diclofenac suppository was used and its dose was recorded. Some complications such as nausea, vomiting and dizziness were recorded too, data were analyzed by SPSS (21) software, P value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. 
Results: VAS score at 2, 4, 6 hours after surgery in case group was significantly lower than that in the control group. (P=0.0001, P=0.0001, P=0.039), respectively. The mean number of administered diclofenac in bupivacaine group was lower than that in placebo group (P=0.0001). The mean and standard deviation of pain free period in bupivacaine group was13.77±2.41 and in placebo group was 5.94± 1.27. Survival rate of analgesia was 14.3% in bupivacaine group and 2.9% in placebo group. This difference was statistically significant (P= 0.001). 
Conclusion: Transverse abdominal plane block with Bupivacaine 0.25% can reduce post caesarean pain without any side effects, such as dizziness, nausea and vomiting, and any effect on the time of ambulation. It can also reduce use of analgesics
Conflict of interest: non declared

