Excessive soil compaction has negative effects for agriculture and the environment. Measurement of soil strength is a common indirect measure of soil compactness. In the context of precision farming, on-the-go soil mechanical resistance measurements using single- and multiple-tip horizontal sensors have been developed. It has been reported that there was a significant relationship between soil mechanical resistance values measured with both vertically operated cone penetrometer and horizontally operated sensors only for relatively deep layers. It was hypothesized that the differences in horizontally measured soil resistance in different soil layers could be explained by different failure modes. The objective of this research was to develop a horizontal soil mechanical resistance sensor and to observe the failure mode in front of it while penetrating soil at three different depths. A single-tip horizontal penetrometer was equipped with a 30° prismatic tip and had a base area of 324 mm2. The prismatic tip was mounted horizontally to an S-shaped load cell housed inside a shank. A data-logging system was also developed to record measurements with 10 Hz sampling rate. The sensor was tested in a field with silty clay loam soil at three depths of 20, 25 and 30 cm. Cone index (CI) values were obtained with 1 cm depth increments and 1 m horizontal intervals along each transect for comparison using a standard cone penetrometer. The results showed that average horizontal soil mechanical resistance index (HRI) values for both depths of 20 and 25 cm were similar due to the brittle failure mode in both cases. However, when the tip was operated below the critical depth of the sensor, the value of HRI at 30 cm depth increased three times when compared with 20 or 25 cm depth values. This was due to change in failure mode from brittle to compressive mode below the critical depth. There was a significant relationship (R2 = 0.75) between HRI and CI for the 30-cm depth, whereas for shallower depths the relation was not significant. It can be concluded that the correlation between measurements obtained with the vertically and horizontally operated penetrometers would be significant as long as both produced the same soil failure mode.
