Many soils in the semiarid Mediterranean Ebro Valley of Spain are prone to physical and chemical degradation due to their silty texture, low organic matter content, and presence of carbonates, gypsum or other soluble salts. Rainfed agriculture on these soils is also hindered by the scarcity of water. No-tillage can increase plant-available water and soil organic matter, thus helping overcome most factors limiting crop production in this area. Our objective was to determine how conventional- and no-tillage practices affected soil physical quality indicators and water availability in an on-farm study in the Ebro Valley. Soil samples were collected from 0 to 5-, 5 to 15-, and 15 to 30-cm depth increments within adjacent farmer-managed conventional- and no-tillage fields in 2007 and 2008. Both fields were managed for continuous barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) production. The soil at both sites is a silt loam (Haplic Calcisol). Aggregate-size distribution and stability, soil water retention characteristics, organic carbon, and total carbonates were determined in 2007. Pore-size distribution was estimated from the water retention curve. Penetration resistance, soil bulk density and field water content during the entire crop growing season were measured for both fields in 2008. Aggregate dry mean weight diameter and stability in water were 1.2 and 2.2 times greater, respectively, under no-tillage than conventional tillage due to reduced mechanical disturbance and increased soil organic carbon content. Bulk density was 1.12 times greater (P &lt; 0.1) under no-tillage only in the 0–5-cm depth. Two times greater penetration resistance to a depth of 15 cm in this treatment was related to bulk density and aggregates stability. Field water content was greater with no-tillage than conventional tillage during the driest months in 2008. The volume of equivalent diameter pores (0.2–9 μm) was 1.5 times higher under no-tillage. This increased plant-available water content and doubled barley production under no-tillage in 2008, which was a very dry year. We conclude that despite the greater penetration resistance under no-tillage, increased water availability as a result of improved structure characteristics was more important for crop yield. This suggests that producers should seriously consider adopting no-tillage practices for soil conservation in semiarid degraded areas like the one studied.
