Introduction: Till now multiple devices have been introduced in order to predict the ''patients'', disability, function, muscle force and mortality in the acute phase of stroke.
Objective: Determination the relationship between electroencephalography (EEG) findings and change of disability, functional status, functional independency, muscle force and mortality of the patients with ischemic stroke.
Materials and Methods: This cross sectional study was performed on 47 patients in the range of 50-90 years old involved by ischemic stroke in the territory of middle cerebral artery, referred to Poursina Hospital in Guilan-Rasht in the north of Iran. At first, for all the patients a brain CT and after 48 hours a brain MRI or CT scan were done routinely to confirm the diagnosis. EEG accomplished during 48-72 hours after stroke, and the ''patients'' were grouped in 3, accoring to EEG abnormality: normal EEG, moderate and severe abnormal EEG. The patients disability, functional independency, functional status, and muscle force, respectively were assessed by Modified Rankin Disability, FIM, Bethel index and Medical Research Council scale(MRC) and their mortality in the first 48 hours, one week and three weeks afterstroke.The data were processed by software SPSS 20 using Chi square, independent T, Post Hoc Tukey,Kruskal-Wallis, Anova,Repeated Measure Anova and Sphericity.
Results: A total of 47 patients (48.6% men, 53.2% women) with mean age of 73.09±9.01 years old participated in this study. Left middle cerebral artery involvement was evident in 46.8% of the patients and the others had right side involvement. First and second groups included 15 patients and third group17 patients and there wasn’t any statistically significant difference between groups in age and sex. (P > 0.05) 
No significant difference was found, either between groups in means and change of means of Rankin score, FIM, Barthel Index and MRC during the study period. (P > 0.05)
Conclusion: EEG findings can’t determine prognostic value for functional outcome and mortality of patients. 
Conflict of interest: non declared

