Introduction: Medical complaints are always the most challenging items in the scope of practice and have great difficulties for both the physician and the patient . Due to the need for comprehensive data for health planning of Guilan province And the importance of this research as factors in occupational safety and health practitioners, patients, research in this area is necessary.
Objective: Determining factors in a complaint to the Medical Council of Doctors in Gilan Province in the years 2005 to 2010
Materials and Methods: In this cross-sectional study of 425 cases related to medical malpractice lawsuits stemming from the Medical Council of Guilan during the years 1385 to 1390 was carried out. Thus the plaintiffs checklist includes information such as age, sex, date of complaint, the complaint doctors information such as gender, field of practice, location of practice, Work Experience and the first instance and appeal preparation was completed. The data were entered into a statistical software SPSS18 and were analyzed using descriptive statistics.
Results: Dentists had the most claims, followed by orthopedic surgeons, General Practitioners , General Surgeons and Gynecologists. Physicians were found innocent and guilty in 354 cases(83.3%) and 67 cases (15.7%) of cases, respectively. Also, patients quit their claims in 4 cases. The most common causes of complaints mentioned by patients, were medical error, complications of treatments and then, financial issues. 
Most causes of proposing a claim were malpractice, treatment complications and financial issues.
Conclusion: The data showed that most of the claims recorded were unfounded and consequently, respective physicians were not guilty. Therefore, knowledge of the patient's physician, the patient is familiar with the methods of treatment and possible side effects and reduce the financial relationship between the physician and patient compliance in many cases can be prevented by a patient complaint.
Conflict of interest: non declared

