Soil quality is influenced by inherent and anthropogenic factors. This study was conducted to provide multiple groups guidance on how to achieve and maintain improved soil quality/health. Our hypothesis was that tillage intensity was the primary anthropogenic factor degrading soil quality, and our objective was to prove that hypothesis through an intensive 2005 sampling of a central Iowa, USA field study. Chisel plow, disk tillage, moldboard plow, ridge-till and no-till treatments, used for 31 years in a two-year, corn (Zea mays L.)/soybean [Glycine max (L.) Merr.] (C/S) rotation or for 26 years of continuous corn (CC) production, were evaluated by measuring 23 potential soil quality indicators. Soil samples from 0 to 5- and 5 to 15-cm depth increments were collected from 158 loam or clay loam sampling sites throughout the 10-ha study site. Nine of the indicators were evaluated by depth increment using the Soil Management Assessment Framework (SMAF) which has scoring functions for 13 soil biological, chemical, and physical measurements and can be used to compute individual indicator indices and an overall soil quality index (SQI). Water-stable aggregation (WSA), total organic carbon (TOC), microbial biomass carbon (MBC), and potentially mineralizable nitrogen (PMN) were all significantly lower for the 0 to 5-cm and generally lower for 5 to 15-cm increments after long-term moldboard plowing and its associated secondary tillage operations. This presumably reflected greater physical breakup and oxidation of above- and below-ground plant residues. Bray-P concentrations in moldboard plow plots were also significantly lower at both depth increments. Between soil texture groups, significant differences were found for WSA, Bray-P, TOC and MBC at both depth increments and for both cropping systems. When combined into an overall SQI, both soil texture groups were functioning at 82–85% of their potential at 0–5-cm and at 75% of their potential at the 5–15-cm depth. Our hypothesis that moldboard plowing would have the greatest negative effect on soil quality indicators was verified. Based on this assessment, we recommend that to achieve and maintain good soil health, producers should strive to adopt less aggressive tillage practices.
