The power management strategy (PMS) plays an important role in the optimum design and efficient utilization of hybrid energy systems. The power available from hybrid systems and the overall lifetime of system components are highly affected by PMS. This paper presents a novel method for the determination of the optimum PMS of hybrid energy systems including various generators and storage units. The PMS optimization is integrated with the sizing procedure of the hybrid system. The method is tested on a system with several widely used generators in off-grid systems, including wind turbines, PV panels, fuel cells, electrolyzers, hydrogen tanks, batteries, and diesel generators. The aim of the optimization problem is to simultaneously minimize the overall cost of the system, unmet load, and fuel emission considering the uncertainties associated with renewable energy sources (RES). These uncertainties are modeled by using various possible scenarios for wind speed and solar irradiation based on Weibull and Beta probability distribution functions (PDF), respectively. The differential evolution algorithm (DEA) accompanied with fuzzy technique is used to handle the mixed-integer nonlinear multi-objective optimization problem. The optimum solution, including design parameters of system components and the monthly PMS parameters adapting climatic changes during a year, are obtained. Considering operating limitations of system devices, the parameters characterize the priority and share of each storage component for serving the deficit energy or storing surplus energy both resulted from the mismatch of power between load and generation. In order to have efficient power exploitation from RES, the optimum monthly tilt angles of PV panels and the optimum tower height for wind turbines are calculated. Numerical results are compared with the results of optimal sizing assuming pre-defined PMS without using the proposed power management optimization method. The comparative results present the efficacy and capability of the proposed method for hybrid energy systems.
