Coal is a non renewable fossil fuel, used mainly as a source of electrical energy and in the production of coke. It is subjected to thermal treatment, pyrolysis, which produces coke as a main product, in addition to a condensed liquid by-product, called tar. Tar is a complex mixture of organic compounds which contains different chemical classes, presenting aromatic and sulphur heterocyclic compounds. In general, identification of these compounds requires steps of isolation and fractionation, mainly due to co-elution of these compounds with polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). The objective of this work is to characterize the sulphur compounds present in the coal tar obtained via pyrolysis, using comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography with time-of-flight mass spectrometry detector (GC × GC/TOFMS). Coal samples from the State of Paranل, Brazil were subjected to laboratorial scale pyrolysis. Several experimental conditions were tested, such as sample weight (5, 10 and 15 g), heating ramp (10, 25 and 100 °C/min) and final temperature (500, 700 and 900 °C). Samples were analyzed by one dimensional gas chromatography (1D-GC) coupled to a quadrupole mass spectrometry detector (GC/qMS) and two-dimensional gas chromatography with time-of-flight mass spectrometry detector (GC × GC/TOFMS). The higher amount of sulphur compounds was obtained at a final temperature of 700 °C and a heating ramp of 100 °C/min. The main classes observed in the color plot were thiophenes, benzothiophenes and alkylated dibenzothiophenes. GC × GC/TOFMS allowed the identification of the greater number of compounds and the separation of several sulphur compounds from one another. Moreover, separation of sulphur compounds from polyaromatic hydrocarbons and phenols was achieved, which was not possible by 1D-GC. Comparing GC × GC/TOFMS and 1D-GC (SIM mode) also showed that 1D-GC, one of the most employed quantification tools for sulphur compounds, can be misleading for detection, identification and quantification, as the number of isomers of sulphur compounds found was greater than theoretically possible.
