Alternative strategies for sample preparation of human blood samples were evaluated including protein precipitation (PP) and solid phase extraction (SPE) on Waters Oasis® polymeric columns. Gradient chromatography within 15 min was performed on a Hypersil Polar-RP column combined with a Sciex API 2000 triple quadrupol instrument equipped with an electro-spray interface. Beta-agonists and beta-antagonists available on the Swedish market were included in the study. A combination of zinc sulphate and ethanol was found effective for PP. A clear supernatant was achieved that either could be injected directly on the LC–MS–MS system for analysis or transferred to a SPE column for further extraction and analyte concentration. Retention on the hydrophilic–lipophilic balanced sorbent HLB as well as the mixed mode cationic MCX and anionic MAX sorbents were investigated. On HBL the relative lipophilicity of the target analytes was investigated. At a high pH when the amino alcohols are deprotonised the more non-polar analytes (e.g., carvediol, betaxolol, bisoprolol and propranolol) were well retained on the sorbent and for the majority methanol content higher than 50% in water (v/v) was needed for elution. Some analytes though, with additional weak acidic functionalities (fenoterol, salbutamol, sotalol, and terbutaline) were poorly retained. On MAX the retention of these weak acids was improved when loaded under basic conditions but under neutral conditions analyte recoveries was comparable with HLB. On MCX all the analytes were well retained allowing a wash step of 100% methanol at neutral and low pH. By applying the supernatant from PP in combination with an additional portion of aqueous formic acid (2%) the analytes could be loaded and retained. High extraction recoveries were found for most analytes but for a few, significant losses were seen during PP (e.g., formoterol) and/or evaporation (e.g., fenoterol, formoterol, labetalol and terbutaline). The effectiveness of the sample preparation was evaluated by ESI ion-suppression studies by post column infusion of the target analyte. An ethanol zinc sulphate aq mixture was found to be more effective than acetonitrile, methanol or ethanol for PP of human whole blood samples. Beside suppression by salts in the front peak, only limited suppression from other artefacts such as more lipophilic compounds was found late in the chromatograms. Some tendency though to concentrate more lipophilic artefacts on the Oasis® sorbents was seen. These findings show that the Oasis MCX sorbent is well suited for sample preparation of beta-agonists and beta-antagonists from human whole blood if the objective is to cover a great number of the analytes in the same assay.
