Background and Objective: Pregnancy is a critical period in the lives of women and is associated with their increased nutritional requirements. Adequate nutrition during this period has a significant impact on maternal and child health. The present study was conducted in order to assess the nutritional status of pregnant women of Iranshahr, Iran.
Materials and Method: A cross-sectional, descriptive analytical study was carried out in Iranshahr, Iran in 2011. Using cluster sampling method, 5 health-care centers were selected. Then, 352 pregnant women referring to the selected health centers were chosen using convenience sampling. The height and weight of each subject were measured and the demographic information form and two questionnaires consisting of 24-hour dietary recalls and the Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) were completed through interviews. Data were analyzed using SPSS18, Student’s t-test (comparison of means with a constant value), and non-parametric tests including Mann-Whitney (comparison of two groups) and Kruskal-Wallis (comparison of more than two groups). Moreover, the Pearson correlation coefficient was used for the comparison of different variables.  
Results: Food analysis revealed that, with the exception of folic acid (P  <  0.001), and vitamins A (P = 0.001) and E (P  <  0.001), the average energy of protein, and other nutrients’ intake in the majority of pregnant women were in accordance with the recommended dietary allowances (RDA). Food intake patterns showed that the consumption of bread and cereals 
(P  <  0.001), dairy products, and fruits and vegetables (P = 0.001), especially in low-weight women, was significantly lower than the recommended levels (P  <  0.001). Furthermore, the consumption of sweets (P = 0.001) and fats (P  <  0.001) in underweight women was lower and in overweight and obese pregnant women was higher than other samples.
Conclusion: The inappropriate dietary pattern and lack of variety in the diet of most pregnant women resulted in the insufficient intake of some micronutrients. Thus, considering the importance of the nutritional status of pregnant women, it is recommended that nutritional education programs be undertaken simultaneously to the implementation of health services programs.  

