Background and Objective: It is known that concentration of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)is reduced in the spermatozoa membrane of asthenozoospermic men. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of combined supplementation of DHA and vitamin E on changes in the serum and membrane fatty acids in asthenozoospermic men.
Materials and Methods: This randomized, triple-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial included  50 (from among 275) asthenozoospermic men with less than 50% sperm motility and less than 25% rapid progressive motility referred to Avicenna Infertility Clinic in Tehran, Iran. They were randomly assigned to one of two groups by stratified blocked randomization. Participants in the intervention and control group took, daily for 12 weeks, 465 mg of DHA plus 600 IU of vitamin E and two placebos, respectively. Sperm characteristics, serum and membrane fatty acid levels, dietary intakes, anthropometric measurements and physical activity were determined at the baseline and at the end of the study. Statistical analyses were performed using the SPSS software, the statistical tests being analysis of covariance, Student's t-test, paired-sample t-test, repeated measurement, Wilcoxon, and Mann-Whitney tests.  
Results: Out of the 50 participants entering the study, 22 in the intervention group and 20 in the control group completed the study. As compared to the control values, there were significant increases in the number of sperms (p < 0.001), sperm concentration (p < 0.037), percent of total motile sperms (p < 0.001), percent of motile sperms with a progressive motility (p < 0.001), DHA content of sperms (p < 0.001), vitamin E concentration of serum (p < 0.001) and percent of DHA content of serum (p < 0.001) in the intervention group. The mean changes (? SD) in the total number of motile sperms and DHA content of the serum were 3.60 ? 2.24 (p < 0.001) and 2.88 ? 0.57 (p < 0.001), respectively.
Conclusion: Based on the findings, it may be concluded that combined supplementation of docosohexaenoic acid and vitamin E in asthenozoospermic men can lead to increases in sperm concentration of of docosohexaenoic acid and sperm motility. This fatty acid combined with vitamin E as an antioxidant may have a role in improving sperm motility.
Keywords: Docosahexaenoic acid, Vitamin E, Asthenozoospermia, Sperm fatty acids, Infertile men

