The general goal of this research was to address the broad question, does consensus work in resource management decision-making? Its purpose was to identify success factors for employing the consensus decision-making model specifically in land use planning; to examine the models incepted by the government of British Columbia during the period 1992–1995; and to investigate the application and effectiveness of the models as actually employed in integrated resource planning in British Columbia. The specific objective was to develop a general diagnostic framework for evaluation, based on indicators and success factors derived from a review of pertinent literature; from interviews with stakeholder participants in these processes; through review of government documentation, and through interviews with government officials who design and manage those processes.

s factors to be tested and explored were compiled from the literature, through a pilot study, government reports, and previous evaluations, such as the CORE Vancouver Island survey. In-depth interviews were conducted with 50 managers and participants of consensus processes at all three levels, in eight planning regions of the province. As interviews of participants proceeded, any new factors which emerged were also added to the list below.


ity of process

ment of participants

ss

it objectives

stakeholder identification

gic communication

tator

information

policy guidelines

eening participants

ng

l chair/process mgr.

ersonal dynamic

operating principles

onships

entative of constituency

g

uity of participants

participants

g facility

language

f group

, support of ministry


dents rated, defined and discussed these factors, and answered general questions regarding success of consensus processes. From qualitative and quantitative analysis, using the spreadsheet program Excel, the following indicators (the top quartile) were determined to be ‘critical’ to the success of a consensus planning process: Integrity; Solid Information; Facilitator; Commitment of Participants; Explicit Objectives; Training; Strategic Communication; and Government Support. Based on an analysis of the definitions and comments of participants, an evaluation framework was developed for consensus processes in land use planning. This includes diagnostic questions, followed by further considerations and recommendations for some critical indicators.
