This paper covers some of the pressing problems of the Arctic Ocean, the existing structures and how cooperation in the region may develop. The region is surrounded by the lands of Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, the Russian Federation and the United States of America, who together formed the Arctic Council in recognition of the fact that the issues facing the north exceed the capabilities and capacities of any one country and that successful solutions must be built on common actions. The expense and difficulty of operating in extreme conditions of the Arctic forced much of the significant arctic research into cooperative bilateral or multilateral projects, usually with a discrete research objective. Global organizations including the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the International Council for Science (ICSU), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), and the International Maritime Organization (IMO) sponsor specific climate related programs in the Arctic. The warming trends in the Arctic provide the motivation for renewed attention on the Arctic, which is changing rapidly both environmentally and socially. The climate and pollution issues, both anthropogenic in origin, have created some priorities in governmental thinking and led to limited additional funding in recent years. Industry needs to be responsive and innovative in incorporating stringent control and monitoring into development projects and in contributing to research and environmental management. Collective efforts by all interested governments will be needed to address the scarcity of research and observations, extending from the oceans to the coastal areas and drainage basins of the hinterlands. Arctic countries must also pursue global arrangements to protect the Arctic from the impacts of pollution from outside areas. The work started by the Arctic Council needs to be bolstered by the establishment of a regional convention for the Arctic, which will confer more responsibility upon governments to continue with the programs.
