This paper presents a methodology to solve a new class of stochastic optimization problems for multidisciplinary systems (multidisciplinary stochastic optimization or MSO) wherein the objective is to maximize system mechanical performance (e.g. aerodynamic efficiency) while satisfying reliability-based constraints (e.g. structural safety). Multidisciplinary problems require a different solution approach than those solved in earlier research in reliability-based structural optimization (single discipline) wherein the goal is usually to minimize weight (or cost) for a structural configuration subject to a limiting probability of failure or to minimize probability of failure subject to a limiting weight (or cost). For the problems solved herein, the objective is to maximize performance over the range of operating conditions, while satisfying constraints that ensure safe and reliable operation. Because the objective is performance based and because the constraints are reliability based, the random variables used in the objective must model variability in operating conditions, while the random variables used in the constraints must model uncertainty in extreme values (to ensure safety). Thus, the problem must be formulated to treat these two different types of variables at the same time, including the case when the same physical quantity (e.g. a particular load) appears in both the objective function and the constraints. In addition, the problem must be formulated to treat multiple load cases, which can again require modeling the same physical quantity with different random variables. Deterministic multidisciplinary optimization (MDO) problems have advanced to the stage where they are now commonly formulated with multiple load cases and multiple disciplines governing the objective and constraints. This advancement has enabled MDO to solve more realistic problems of much more practical interest. The formulation used herein solves stochastic optimization problems that are posed in this same way, enabling similar practical benefits but, in addition, producing optimum designs that are more robust than the deterministic optimum designs (since uncertainties are accounted for during the optimization process). The methodology has been implemented in the form of a baseline MSO shell that executes on both a massively parallel computer and a network of workstations. The MSO shell is demonstrated herein by a stochastic shape optimization of an axial compressor blade involving fully coupled aero-structural analysis.
