During April 1994, the three-frequency radar system flew on the Space Shuttle Endeavour, known as SIR-C/X-SAR mission (Shuttle Imaging Radar C/X-Synthetic Aperture Radar). Over the Orgeval watershed (France), the ground condition stayed very wet throughout the 5-day SAR mission. The SAR imagery allows a data collection over a range of roughness conditions on bare soils. Three classes were identified: very smooth sowings with crusted top layer, cloddy surfaces, and different ploughed fields for future crops. To complement the Shuttle Radar data (three frequencies L, C, X, incidence range from 44째 to 57째), the helicopter-borne scatterometer ERASME (C- and X-bands, copolorized configurations) was used. Merging of the two databases was possible. As a result, incidence angles ranging from 25째 to 50째 are available in C- and X-bands for the copolarized cross sections. Then the major objective of the article is, over this available data collection, to begin the validation of current surface backscattering models to natural surfaces, the theoretical integral equation model (IEM) of Fung et al. (1992) and the empirical model of Oh et al. (1994). It shows adequacies and limits. The IEM model reproduces well radar scatter over smooth surfaces, but fails over rough surfaces, predicting a flatter response with incidence angle than the observed signals in C- and X-bands. Difference in backscatter response due to direction angles (perpendicular and parallel to the row direction) is difficult to reproduce over smooth surfaces by this model integrating anisotropic surface but may be due to the unadequacy of the surface representation. The Oh algorithm agrees well with the backscatter response over rough surfaces at medium incidence angle, but fails with a systematic underestimation over smooth conditions. As a conclusion, further developments are necessary on derivation of theoritical solutions over rough surfaces and on validation of semiempirical algorithms over data sets of various training sources (radar and natural conditions).
