The boreal tree line is expected to advance upwards into the mountains and northwards into the tundra due to global warming. The major objective of this study was to find out if it is possible to use high-resolution airborne laser scanner data to detect very small trees — the pioneers that are pushing the tree line up into the mountains and out onto the tundra. The study was conducted in a sub-alpine/alpine environment in southeast Norway. A total of 342 small trees of Norway spruce, Scots pine, and downy birch with tree heights ranging from 0.11 to 5.20 m were precisely georeferenced and measured in field. Laser data were collected with a pulse density of 7.7 m− 2. Three different terrain models were used to process the airborne laser point cloud in order to assess the effects of different pre-processing parameters on small tree detection. Greater than 91% of all trees &gt; 1 m tall registered positive laser height values regardless of terrain model. For smaller trees (&lt; 1 m), positive height values were found in 5–73% of the cases, depending on the terrain model considered. For this group of trees, the highest rate of trees with positive height values was found for spruce. The more smoothed the terrain model was, the larger the portion of the trees that had positive laser height values. The accuracy of tree height derived from the laser data indicated a systematic underestimation of true tree height by 0.40 to 1.01 m. The standard deviation for the differences between laser-derived and field-measured tree heights was 0.11–0.73 m. Commission errors, i.e., the detection of terrain objects — rocks, hummocks — as trees, increased significantly as terrain smoothing increased. Thus, if no classification of objects into classes like small trees and terrain objects is possible, many non-tree objects with a positive height value cannot be separated from those actually being trees. In a monitoring context, i.e., repeated measurements over time, we argue that most other objects like terrain structures, rocks, and hummocks will remain stable over time while the trees will change as they grow and new trees are established. Thus, this study indicates that, given a high laser pulse density and a certain density of newly established trees, it would be possible to detect a sufficient portion of newly established trees over a 10 years period to claim that tree migration is taking place.
