Several investigations indicate that the Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) contains information that can be used to complement spectral information for improved land cover classification accuracies. Prior studies on the addition of BRDF information to improve land cover classifications have been conducted primarily at local or regional scales. Thus, the potential benefits of adding BRDF information to improve global to continental scale land cover classification have not yet been explored. Here we examine the impact of multidirectional global scale data from the first Polarization and Directionality of Earth Reflectances (POLDER) spacecraft instrument flown on the Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS-1) platform on overall classification accuracy and per-class accuracies for 15 land cover categories specified by the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme (IGBP).

of 36,648 global training pixels (7 × 6 km spatial resolution) was used with a decision tree classifier to evaluate the performance of classifying POLDER data with and without the inclusion of BRDF information. BRDF ‘metrics’ for the eight-month POLDER on ADEOS-1 archive (10/1996–06/1997) were developed that describe the temporal evolution of the BRDF as captured by a semi-empirical BRDF model. The concept of BRDF ‘feature space’ is introduced and used to explore and exploit the bidirectional information content. The C5.0 decision tree classifier was applied with a boosting option, with the temporal metrics for spectral albedo as input for a first test, and with spectral albedo and BRDF metrics for a second test. Results were evaluated against 20 random subsets of the training data.

ation of the BRDF feature space indicates that coarse scale BRDF coefficients from POLDER provide information on land cover that is different from the spectral and temporal information of the imagery. The contribution of BRDF information to reducing classification errors is also demonstrated: the addition of BRDF metrics reduces the mean, overall classification error rates by 3.15% (from 18.1% to 14.95% error) with larger improvements for producer's accuracies of individual classes such as Grasslands (+ 8.71%), Urban areas (+ 8.02%), and Wetlands (+ 7.82%). User's accuracies for the Urban (+ 7.42%) and Evergreen Broadleaf Forest (+ 6.70%) classes are also increased. The methodology and results are widely applicable to current multidirectional satellite data from the Multi-angle Imaging Spectroradiometer (MISR), and to the next generation of POLDER-like multi-directional instruments.
