Introduction: Any organization such as health centers have a specific organizational climate which is considered as the almost constant characteristics of its internal climate and among one of the distinguishing factor of two similar climates. Implementation model of excellence in health care centers, Causing improve their organizational climate and have had valuable role in order to maintain of nurses and improve the quality of service provided to patients. 
Aim: The main objective of this present study was conducted to determine and compare the organizational climate in hospitals which operate organization’s excellence model and other hospitals of the Tehran University of Medical Sciences in nurses’ perspective.
Method: This is a local research conducted based on descriptive-comparative approach in 2013. The study population of this work include all nurses employed in hospitals operating the excellence model and other hospitals associated to the Tehran University of Medical Sciences. In this research, 248 nurses were selected through random stratified sampling method. The tool used in this research had consists of two parts: demographic information and Munn organizational climate questionnaire. After collecting the requireddata, they were analyzed through SPSS17 software using the descriptive statistical criteria (frequency and mean) and inferential statistics (independent t-test).
Results: The results showed that the mean and Standard deviation organizational climate score of the hospitals operating the excellence model and the other hospitals were as 19.31 ± 65.28 and 2.36 ± 56.42 respectively. Besides, the analyses indicated that the excellence organizations had a more preferred climate. The results of independent t-test indicated a significant difference in organizational climate scores
(p = 0.001).
Conclusion: Based on findings of this research, although organizational climate in operating hospitals of excellence model was more suitable as compared to the other hospitals, only 12.2 % and  9.28 % of them had Respectively Excellent and good climate. Accordingly, the managers are required to make an effort for applying novel managerial strategies to provide a more favorable organizational climatefor offering services with higher quality.
Key words: organizational climate, attractive hospitals, european foundation for quality management model, nurses attitudes
