Objective
estigate age and sex differences in the utilisation of hospital services for ischaemic heart disease.

is of routine mortality data and hospital activity data.
g
West Thames Regional Health Authority.
ts
nts of the South West Thames Regional Health Authority who in 1991 either died from ischaemic heart disease or were admitted to an NHS hospital in England and Wales with a main diagnosis of ischaemic heart disease.
utcome measures
of consultant episodes to deaths from ischaemic heart disease (as a proxymeasure of the utilisation of hospital care), and the percentages of consultant episodes in which further investigation (angiography or catheterisation) or revascularisation treatment (coronary artery bypass grafting or angioplasty) were carried out.
s
tio of episodes to deaths was similar in men and women (odds ratio for men vs. women 0.96, 95% confidence intervals 0.90 to 1.03). The percentage of episodes in which further investigation was carried out was higher in men than women (odds ratio for men vs. women 1.46, 95% confidence intervals 1.25 to 1.70) as was the percentage of episodes in which revascularisation treatment was carried out (odds ratio for men vs. women 1.46, 95% confidence intervals 1.20 to 1.77). The ratio of episodes to deaths, the percentage of episodes in which further investigation was carried out, and the percentage of episodes in which revascularisation treatment was carried out all declined with age (all p values &lt;0.001).
sions
with ischaemic heart disease are as likely as men to be admitted to hospital, but afteradmission are less likely to undergo further investigation and revascularisation treatment. Elderly patients with ischaemic heart disease are less likely than younger patients to be admitted to hospital; after admission, they are also less likely to undergo further investigation and revascularisation treatment. Further research is needed to determine whether these age and sex differences in the use of hospital services are clinically justified.
