Objective: Tendon never returns to its complete biological and mechanical properties
after repair. Bone marrow and, recently, adipose tissue have been used as sources of
mesenchymal stem cells which have been proven to enhance tendon healing. In the
present study, we compared the effects of allotransplantation of bone marrow derived
mesenchymal stromal cells (BMSCs) and adipose derived stromal vascular fraction
(SVF) on tendon mechanical properties after experimentally induced flexor tendon
transection.
Materials and Methods: In this experimental study, we used 48 adult male New Zealand
white rabbits. Twelve of rabbits were used as donors of bone marrow and adipose tissue,
the rest were divided into control and treatment groups. The injury model was a unilateral
complete transection of the deep digital flexor tendon. Immediately after suture repair,
4×106 cells of either fresh SVF from enzymatic digestion of adipose tissue or cultured
BMSCs were intratendinously injected into tendon stumps in the treatment groups. Controls
received phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Immobilization with a cast was continued
for two weeks after surgery. Animals were sacrificed three and eight weeks after surgery
and tendons underwent mechanical evaluations. The differences among the groups were
analyzed using the analysis of variance (ANOVA) test followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons
test.
Results: Stromal cell transplantation resulted in a significant increase in ultimate and
yield loads, energy absorption, and stress of repairs compared to the controls. However,
there were no statistically significant changes detected in terms of stiffness. In comparison,
we observed no significant differences at the third week between SVF and BMSCs
treated tendons in terms of all load related properties. However, at the eighth week SVF
transplantation resulted in significantly increased energy absorption, stress and stiffness
compared to BMSCs.
Conclusion: The enhanced biomechanical properties of repairs in this study advocates
the application of adipose derived SVF as an excellent source of multipotent cells instead
of traditional BMSCs and may seem more encouraging in cell-based therapy for tendon
injuries.
