Objective: Assessments of cell reactions such as motility, orientation and activation to
the topography of the substratum will assist with the fabrication of a proper implantable
scaffold for future tissue engineering applications.The current challenge is to analyze the
orientation effect of elecrospun nanofibers of poly (?-caprolactone) (PCL) on viability and
proliferation of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs).
Materials and Methods: In this experimental study, we used the electrospinning method
to fabricate nanofibrous PCL scaffolds. Chemical and mechanical characterizations were
specified by the contact angle and tensile test. O2 plasma treatment was used to improve
surface hydrophilicity. We used the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assay to evaluate mESCs adhesion and proliferation before and after surface
modification. The influence of the orientation of the nanofibers on mESCs growth was
evaluated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Statistical analysis was performed
using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) With differences considered statistically significant
at p?0.05.
Results: The results showed that plasma treatment improved the hydrophilic property
of PCL scaffolds. MTT assay showed a significant increase in proliferation of mESCs on
plasma treated PCL (p-PCL) scaffolds compared to non-treated PCL (p?0.05). However
gelatin coated tissue culture plate (TCP) had a better effect in initial cell attachment after
one day of cell seeding. There was more cell proliferation on day 3 in aligned plasma
treated (AP) nanofibers compared to the TCP. SEM showed optical density of the cell
colonies. Aligned nanofibrous scaffolds had larger colony sizes and spread more than
random nanofibrous scaffolds.
Conclusion: This study showed that plasma treating of scaffolds was a more suitable
substrate for growth and cell attachment. In addition, aligned nanofibrous scaffolds highly
supported the proliferation and spreading of mESCs when compared to random nanofibrous
scaffolds and TCP.
