A resilient strategy for optimal demand response control based on the management of highly-distributed electric loads is presented to meet transmission-level control aimed at maintaining voltage stability. The proposed load control scheme balances device- and grid-level objectives simultaneously, and is demonstrated for a system comprising a distributed responsive population of 14,000 residential-sized buildings integrated in a transmission system network consisting of six buses. Air-source heat pumps are implemented as the primary heating source in the responsive building population, and are introduced as a dispatchable grid-side energy resource, where aggregated output can be objectively ramped up or down through the use of an optimal centralized control strategy. A two step multi-objective optimization procedure is implemented to simultaneously satisfy balancing of the power system and customer objectives across a multi-scalar system. At the power system-level, the optimal preventive control scheme is obtained based on steady-state voltage stability constraints. At the customer-level, an optimal demand response strategy is proposed, wherein the aggregate power demand from a population of heat pumps is controlled to follow load-shedding requirements. The customer comfort is continuously maintained by constrained regulation of the thermal set-point governing operation of the heat pump device.

oposed demand-side strategy achieves similar goals to conventional approaches to regulation and spinning reserve ancillary services, but with the significant benefit of higher efficiencies. Under the proposed scheme, ancillary services provided by the electric loads effectively become virtual generators that enhance the voltage stability in power systems operating under increased uncertainty, and replace severe or multiple contingency reserves typically supplied by conventional generators. The proposed demand response control scheme can be extended to other potentially responsive end-use appliances, and opens avenues for increased exploitation of intermittent renewable energy resources while reducing operating costs and emissions.
