Background and objective: Spiritual health is considered as one of the valuable capitals of humans that it is less visible but so far it is studied less. Further its relationship with happiness, as positive life satisfaction, has become new issue that is addressed less. The main objective of research is examination of relationship between spiritual health and happiness among students of Tarbiat Modares University (TMU) in 1392.
 Methods: In this research, spiritual health has been analyzed according Ellison questionnaire base on three dimensions include cognitive, emotional and behavior aspects. Also happiness has been analyzed according Oxford questionnaire with 5 domains include life satisfaction, self-esteem, subjective well-being, satisfaction and positive mood. The statistical population of the study includes 90 students of TMU base on Cochran formula in 1392. Therefore 90 respondents were selected according with random sampling approach. The method applied in this research relies on the questionnaire research approach. So, Data was collected via questionnaire. The results were analyzed by SPSS 13. Descriptive (frequency and percentage) and analytical statistics (linear regression analysis, Pearson correlation coefficient and one way ANOVA, Mann- Whitney Test) were used for analyzing the data. 
Results: Finally it was reviewed and studied spiritual health dimensions as an independent variable with happiness as dependent variable. Correlation coefficient was 0/62 between spiritual health and happiness. All the calculations were carried out with the confidence level 0.95.It was approved that spiritual health of students has a significant and positive relationship with happiness. Also we can see that all dimensions of spiritual health and happiness related together and the most relation between them is related on the emotional dimension and the less related to behavior dimension of spiritual health in students. The score mean of spiritual health got (76/1± 12/85) with respect to the mean sum (± SD) grades in students and score mean of happiness got (75/46±14/87). 
Conclusion: The results of this study indicate that students, this enormous and important group in society, can get more happiness with planning on emotional and cognitive dimension and this is more stability and durability. 
Paper Type: Research Article. 

