Protein splicing involves the self-catalyzed excision of an intervening polypeptide segment, an intein, from a precursor protein. The first two steps in the protein splicing process lead to the formation of ester intermediates through nucleophilic attacks by the side chains of cysteine, serine, or threonine residues adjacent to the splice junctions. Since both nucleophilic residues in the Mycobacterium tuberculosis RecA intein are cysteine, their reactivities could be compared by sulfhydryl group titration. This was accomplished by using fusion proteins containing a truncated RecA intein modified by mutation to prevent protein splicing, in which the cysteines at the splice junctions were the only sulfhydryl groups. The ability to undergo hydroxylamine-induced cleavage at the upstream splice junction showed that the modified intein was not impaired in the ability to form ester intermediates. Sulfhydryl titration with iodoacetamide, monitored by quantitating the residual thiols after reaction with a maleimide derivative of biotin, revealed a striking difference in the apparent pKa values of the cysteines at the two splice junctions. The apparent pKa of the cysteine at the upstream splice junction, which initiates the N–S acyl rearrangement leading to the linear ester intermediate, was approximately 8.2, whereas that of the cysteine residue at the downstream splice junction, which initiates the transesterification reaction converting the linear ester to the branched ester intermediate, was about 5.8. This suggests that the transesterification step is facilitated by an unusually low pKa of the attacking thiol group. Comparison of the rates of cleavage of the linear ester intermediates derived from the M. tuberculosis RecA and the Saccharomyces cerevisiae VMA inteins by dithiothreitol and hydroxylamine revealed that the former reacted relatively more slowly with dithiothreitol, suggesting that the RecA intein has diverged in the course of evolution to react preferentially with thiolate anions and thus lacks the basic groups that may facilitate nucleophilic attack by thiols in other inteins.
