Introduction 
The term “modernism” which renaissance is used as its Persian equivalence was applied in 1863 firstly by Bolder in meaning of “destroying stereo typical forms” that prevent from changing thoughts and customs. Modernism in comparision with rehabilitation that is an objective process, is mostly subjective process because modernism is kind of ideology, kind of thought that tries to displace modern instead of old and so it thinks of modern displace modern instead of old and so it thinks of modern better than old (sorush 1999 : 52). “Cafiyar and Vensono” , in their definition of modernism, consider individualism, subjectivism and conventionality, customization and desanctity as main elements of modern society (Tapia 2000 : 107). Modernism in religion area is a process that is joined with innovation and rehabilitation , decharming from references such as religion and custom, displacing material rationalism instead of divine believes in organizing current life and relying on science and technology as motor power of development. Gidens believes that confronting with custom is nature of modernism (ghasemi et al, 2010). Customization is a defense reaction that resolves problems by referring to customs that modern world face with them. Although modernism decharms them, cultural modernism dimension includes three elements as criticism, customizing believes and scientism(ghasemi et al, 2010). Some scholors such as shojaizand  (2006) believe that coexistence of these two items is possible if they fall short in favor of other. In religious modernism discussion, we can observe several groups in society, religious traditionalists, who insist on their traditional believes and do not accept any criticism and idea in religious issues. But in our society history, we encounter with modernists that both accept traditional laws of religion and scientism and critical baces in religion. This group accept religion and its bases by a new view, this is a circumstance that our modern society accepts. Of course it can be said that this is the same scientism and religious rationalism that our religious bases point to it again and again. And this group can be also placed in traditionalists group because science, experience and rationalism are original bases of modernism and displays other aspects of its modernism by appearing rationalism and we trap into western modernism. Other group is extreme modernists that want to determine all bases of religion and traditions by rules of modernism, and sometimes lead to secularism. So modernism is not free of difficulty in religion area and as some researches (salehi 2010) showed it is joined with social disorders. West culture bases values order and basical morality on humanism, secularism and leisure seeking, basical educations and sciences regulate on rationalism and instrumental wisdom and skills and technology is based on pragmatism and utilitarianism(Zahed, 2005). Relationship between religion and modernism was changed to religious secularization, in other words, by relying on individualism, liberalism and personalism , in religion , the religion is separated from fundamental wishes. Modernism in religion area or traditionalism with scientism procedure and religious rationalism is that we accept religious bases by a new view.

 
Material and Methods
This study is measurement one and was performed as cross – section. The present research statistical society is consisted of 15-40 years old youth in yazd.
Sample bulk was estimated 384 persons for this study by kocaran formula and multi-step cluster sampling method was used for selected persons.
Measurement tools: for collecting data, well – established religious modernism questionnaire was used.
Religious modernism measure: in order to measure religious modernism degree of people, well- established five dimension religious scale was used. In this scale, five dimensions of religion were measured on respondant’s traditionalism or modernism. In order to determine validity of religious modernism scale, content validity method was used, it means that validity and value of scale was confirmed by some experts. For measuring internal reliability of religious modernism scale, kronbach – Alph method was used. This reliability degree was 79% and it was 96% , 74% , 76& , 86% and 93% respectively for subscales of religious modernism, namely belief, customs , cognitive, outcome and affective dimensions these values in %5 level shows suitable reliability of sub scales of religious modernism scale.
Data of this study was processed by SPSS program 

Discussion and conclusion
As the results showed, religious modernism level in each five dimensions is low between youth In Yazd. Especially partial results of this work showed that experimentalism and scientism is more popular in religious bases between youth and cases such as humanism, individualism and personalism are low in religion. Also religious modernism corresponds with variables such as age, gender, education, employment type and well-being of family. In other words, more youth are younger, they have higher education, are in higher rank of jobs and have more well-being, also they have more tendency toward religious modernism and personalism in religion area.
Modernism in religion area is of significance twice in our society especially in Yazd. If religious bases are put together by some principles such as rationalism and scientism, an ideal condition is appeared and we do not expose to social disorders, because Islam wants people to accept religious principles thought fully and accepting them is not conflict with some modernism principles. But if we are affected with etreme modernism and enter all modernism principles in religion, religion will be customized and we will be involved personalism in religion, tendency toward abundance and private religion, that social disorders will be appeared and anomic situation is created according to our society culture that is based on religious traditional bases.
For example Salehi’s research (2010) showed that although increase in vationalism is one of the principles of modernism, but what’s ever people become more modernism in religion, they know less about the results and damaqes of unsuitable relations between girl and boy. So prevention is better than remedy in all cases and deep study is needed until all challenges are considered and we introduce procedures for setting modernism bases, its principles and mixing them with religious thoughts for youth.

