Introduction
The main purpose of all educational systems is to learn the maximum concepts of emission sources, and especially from teachers. Regarding the importance of social presence and interaction in increasing the students’ learning and universities’ tendency to virtual education, the present study attempts to investigate the relationship between the mentioned variables such as social presence, interaction and students’ academic achievement.  Literature review indicates that one of the big differences between online learning systems with on campus systems are in the rate of students' social presence, the rate of social presence in virtual environments is less that face to face class. The researchers and other experts in this field are trying to decrease the gap between these two systems by increasing the interactivity level by using a variety of methods. The main purpose of this paper is to find differences between these two mentioned systems according to their rate of students' social presence and their interactivity. Comparing these variables according to students' demographic information and academic achievement is the other objective of this paper. 

 
Materials and Methods
The study method was descriptive correlation one.  Statistical populations were students of online courses and on campus students of University of Isfahan in 2011-2012. Samples included 85 online students and 150 students of on campus which were selected randomly.  For gathering data, Chih-Hsiung (2001) Social Presence Inventory and self made questionnaires were used. Data obtained from this study were analyzed by using SPSS software. Inferential statistical methods such as t- test, Anova and Manova were used for analyzing the data.

Discussions of Results & Conclusions
The obtained results indicated that there was a significant positive relationship between students’ interaction and their social presence in both groups. The rate of students' interaction and social presence of on campus were more than online courses and students in both groups prefer on campus method rather than online ones. There was only significant positive relationship between online students’ interaction with their previous academic achievement. Relation between interaction and genders showed that there were only differences between girls and boys regarding to their educational environments. In the on campus case, there were not any differences between girls and boys but in the online environments, girls were more active than boys. Comparing students’ interactions according to academic majors indicated that there were differences between students in terms of their academic disciplines. Students of Executive Management and Marketing had more interactive activities than the Book keeping students. There were differences between Strength students and weaker students in terms of their interaction with others according to their kind of education (online or on campus). In the online learning environments, strength students had more interactive activities than on campus students, in reverse, weaker students had more interaction with other students and teachers for getting help. There were not any differences between social presence of students of both groups according to their demographic information and academic achievement. Conclusions: In regard to the results of the present study and the literature review, there are differences between students of online learning environments and on campus universities regarding to their social presence and interaction. The type and rate of the interaction is different in both groups according to the demographic information. According to the maintained results recommendations are made for policy makers and other educational planners. Including administrating

