Background and Aim: Considering the social and cultural characteristics of Iranian adolescents, none of the quantitative instruments designed so far to assess their health needs is quite appropriate. The purpose of this study was to design a valid and reliable questionnaire to assess the health needs of Iranian adolescent females.
Materials and Methods: Both qualitative and quantitative approaches to instrument development were adopted in this study conducted in the District of Sari in the north of Iran. Sampling was objective-based, with an attempt to have female adolescent sample as varied as possible. In the qualitative phase, a content analysis approach was used to explore the concept of health needs as seen by female adolescents. Data were collected using 8 focus group discussions (FGDs) with the presence 6-10 adolescents 12-18 years old in each FGD, as well as 11 semi-structured interviews, each one involving 11 well-informed individuals. In the quantitative phase, the psychometric properties, including content validity, face validity, construct validity, concurrent validity, internal consistency, and test-retest reliability, were determined.
Results: Five themes were identified in the qualitative phase of study, including psycho-emotional health, social health, physical health, and educational needs, as well as spiritual beliefs. The mean scale-level content validity index (S-CVI) was found to be 0.92. The factor structure of the instrument was identified by doing a Principal Component Analysis. Five factors were extracted with a total variance account of 45.37%. The reliability and consistency of the instrument were established with the Cronbach's alpha coefficient (0.90) for the entire scale and test-retest reliability with a 2 week-interval Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC=0.984, p<0.001).There was a concurrent correlation between the instrument and Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL TM 4.0) (r=0.66, p<0.001).
Conclusion: The instrument developed in this study is a valid, reliable and culturally appropriate instrument for assessment of health needs of Iranian adolescent females. 

