Background and Aim: The quality of working life is a very important variable in connection with human resources. Therefore, it should be taken into consideration by managers if they aim to improve the capabilities and efficiency of their staff, which will, in turn, lead to improved productivity and economic growth. Productivity is an important factor in the success of hospital nurses too. The objective of this study was to determine the association between the quality of working life and productivity of nurses. Knowledge of this relationship can help plan to improve the nurses' quality of working life and, subsequently, improve their productivity and, ultimately, productivity of a hospital.
Materials and Methods: This was a cross-sectional correlation study conducted in 2011. The study population was nurses of the Shahid-Beheshti University of Medical Sciences hospitals in Tehran, Iran. Using the randomized stratified multistage sampling method, 380 nurses were selected as the study sample. Data on the nurses' quality of working life and productivity were collected using two questionnaires and analyzed using SPSS-17, the statistical tests being Chi-2, ANOVA, T-test, and the Pearson correlation test.
Results: The findings showed that nurses' quality of work life and productivity were at the middle level, with a mean of 2.47 and 3.07, respectively.  A very small number (1.55%) of the nurses reported that their quality of work life was at a high level, while the majority (82.4%) believed their quality of work life to be at a moderate level. The Pearson correlation test showed a significant positive relationship between the quality of work life and productivity of the nurses (r = 0.66, p-value = 0.001).
Conclusion: Only a low proportion of the nurses report their quality of working life and productivity to be at a high level. Therefore, bearing in mind that a statistically significant relationship exists between the quality of working life and productivity, authorities should atempt to promote the nurses' quality of work life in order to increase their productivity.

