Organizational citizenship behavior involves behaviors that individuals are not forced by organization to do. In one hand, since organizational citizen-ship behavior is an intra-organizational process, and is influenced by organi-zational factors such as management support, reward mechanism, organiza-tional culture, organizational justice, quality of work life, and so on, it seems that studying the role and impact of these factors on its process can improve, facilitate, and expedite the consequences related to  citizenship behavior goals in an organization. However, the objective of current study is to ex-amine the relationship between quality of work life    _such as fair wages and salaries, job security, opportunities to train and growth, and    participation in decision making_ and the organizational citizenship behavior in Fars Gas Company. The research population includes 170 employees in Iran Gas Company. 103 employees were selected using simple random sampling. Data collection was performed through questionnaire. Two questionnaires of “quality of working life” and “Organizational citizenship behavior” were used in this research. The opinions of specialist professors in this field were used to assess the validity of questionnaires. Its validity was positive and ac-ceptable. Chronbach’s Alpha were used to assess the reliability of question-naires that the reliability of questionnaire “quality of working life” was 88.3, and the reliability of questionnaire “Organizational citizenship behavior” was 90.3. Statistical software SPSS also was used to analyze the data. Hypo-thesis is examined using Pearson`s correlation coefficient test, then quality of work life`s components is ranked using Friedman`s test, and the status of organizational citizenship behavior is determined in Fars Gas Company using t-sample test. A conceptual model is presented that considers the quality of work life`s components, and all hypotheses are confirmed based on the re-sults of this conceptual model.
