Land surface albedo is one of the key parameters in the radiation budget, the hydrological cycle and climate modeling studies. It is now widely understood that large errors may occur in the estimation of surface albedo without taking into consideration the anisotropy reflectance effect, which is a general feature of the earth surface. Two major anisotropic correction methods exist for the retrieval of land surface albedo under clear sky conditions. One method involves linearly converting from top of the atmosphere (TOA) albedo to surface albedo, and another is based on the inversion of the Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) model of the surface. In the present study, a new approach that utilizes an empirical model for estimating surface albedo has been proposed for snow free land surfaces under clear sky conditions. We analyzed the bidirectional reflectance data set with numerous samples representing various land cover types, which derived from POLDER/ADEOS-1 multi-angle imagery data and distributed by MEDIAS-France. Through the analysis, an empirical relation between bidirectional reflectance and albedo was established and has been discussed in detail. The proposed model can be used for direct estimation of surface albedo from a single BRF observation when the sun-target-sensor geometry is known. No BRDF model inversion scheme is necessary. The present model has no or weak dependence on the existing land surface classifications, and is insensitive to wavelength. The theoretical absolute accuracy of the estimated albedo is approximately 0.010 for visible (0.4–0.7 μm), 0.023 for near infrared (0.7–3.0 μm) and 0.016 for shortwave (0.2–3.0 μm), respectively. Albedo consistency with viewing geometry has been verified, resulting in good agreement for albedo estimated from various viewing directions. Validation of the satellite estimated albedo derived by the proposed method, using field observations were also presented and results show it can give reasonably accurate estimation. The proposed method is expected to be a suitable candidate for practical applications of albedo estimation for sensors that do not perform multi-angle observations.
