Repeatable approaches for mapping saltcedar (Tamarix spp.) at regional scales, with the ability to detect low density stands, is crucial for the species' effective control and management, as well as for an improved understanding of its current and potential future dynamics. This study had the objective of testing subpixel classification techniques based on linear and nonlinear spectral mixture models in order to identify the best possible classification technique for repeatable mapping of saltcedar canopy cover along the Forgotten River reach of the Rio Grande. The suite of methods tested were meant to represent various levels of constraints imposed in the solution as well as varying levels of classification details (species level and landscape level), sources for endmembers (space-borne multispectral image, airborne hyperspectral image and in situ spectra measurements) and mixture modes (linear and nonlinear). A multiple scattering approximation (MSA) model was proposed as a means to represent canopy (image) reflectance spectra as a nonlinear combination of subcanopy (field) reflectance spectra. The accuracy of subpixel canopy cover was assessed through a 1-m spatial-resolution hyperspectral image and field measurements. Results indicated that: 1) When saltcedar was represented by one single image spectrum (endmember), the unconstrained linear spectral unmixing with post-classification normalization produced comparable accuracy (OA = 72%) to those delivered by partially and fully constrained linear spectral unmixing (63–72%) and even by nonlinear spectral unmixing (73%). 2) The accuracy of the fully constrained linear spectral unmixing method increased (from 67% to 77%) when the classes were represented with several image spectra. 3) Saltcedar canopy reflectance showed the strongest nonlinear relationship with respect to subcanopy reflectance, as indicated through a range of estimated canopy recollision probabilities. 4) Despite the considerations of these effects on canopy reflectance, the inversion of the nonlinear spectral mixing model with subcanopy reflectance (field) measurements yielded slightly lower accuracy (73%) than the linear counterpart (77%). Implications of these results for region-wide monitoring of saltcedar invasion are also discussed.
