Self-consolidating concrete (SCC) is designed to exhibit high deformability and stability to maintain homogenous suspension of coarse aggregate particles in the mortar during flow to ensure adequate passing ability of the concrete through restricted areas and the filling of the formwork without any consolidation. Proper deformability and uniform suspension of coarse aggregate particles in the matrix are key parameters to ensure successful casting and adequate in situ performance. The required flow properties of concrete are affected by the rheological properties of the mixture and the characteristics of the cast element, including the level of reinforcement.

xture proportioning of SCC involves tailoring several mixture parameters to achieve adequate stability and reduce the risk of arching of solid particles and blockage at the vicinity of closely spaced obstacles which is required to ensure proper passing ability and flow characteristics. The objective of this study is to evaluate the coupled effect of mixture parameters and density of reinforcement on flow characteristics of SCC using a statistical design approach. This study seeks to model the coupled effect of the content of supplementary cementitious materials (SCMs), coarse aggregate volume (CA), and density of reinforcement on flowability, passing ability, and filling capacity of SCC. The comparison between predicted and measured responses determined on eight mixtures indicates the accuracy of the established models to describe the effect of the independent variables on the flow behavior of SCC through restricted sections. The derived models show that the flow rate of SCC in the presence of reinforcement is dominated by the content of SCM and clear spacing between the reinforcement. On the other hand, the SCM content is shown to have a three-time greater effect on plastic viscosity than the relative volume of coarse aggregate. Trade-offs between rheological parameters, clear spacing, and flow of SCC in the presence of obstacles showed that for a given clear spacing, higher viscosity and lower yield stress values resulted in higher flow time of concrete. For clear spacing between obstacles of 30 mm, SCC mixtures with plastic viscosity lower than 50 Pa s and yield stress of 45 Pa are shown to ensure proper passing ability.
