Introduction
Uncontrolled urban growth by creating and increasing inequality in urban context has caused residence in the marginalized area and Slums, and to developing it. There are several problems; marginalized areas prone to social harms have been numerous. In this paper, we study and consider the problem of anomie; it is regarded as one of the most important problems of the marginalized. Anomie is the social situation that the distinctive feature of it, disintegration of norms that govern social interactions and relationships. Anomie or social chaos is an irregularity or anomaly situation in which people are unable to communicate with common rules and to satisfy your needs. According to Durkheim, anomie includes state or trait that is missing is a set of rules governing social functions. In the anomic conditions, because of lack of governance norms, conflict between them, to emerging the fields produce no clear norms, lack of commitment to moral and social rules and patterns, as well as guide social behavior, do not arise.In other words, in the circumstances disorder, conflict, instability of norms, and in some areas, the abnormality is clearly visible.In this paper, emerging the social anomie in the marginal areas associated with several important factors has been studied, religiosity, moral illegality, instrumental illegality, cultural capital and economic capital. Many sociologists argue that marginalization in the large metropolitan cities originate of forms of social deviations within them. So, Tabriz is one of the metropolitans involved with the issue of marginalization, and its consequences are incidence of social abnormalities. Considering the above discussion, the main objective of this paper is to examine the factors in creating anomie marginalized Tabriz. 

 
Material and Metods
This survey research was conducted in 2013. Questionnaire is used for data gathering, and to analyze the data, SPSS software and Pearson correlation test and regression analysis were used. Research population, are all citizens and marginalized areas of the Tabriz city, according to extensive research population, the most appropriate sampling method for this study is a multi-stage cluster sampling. The sample size using Cochran formula, 384 is estimated. In this study, the validity of questions about social anomie was assessed through face validity. To determine the reliability of the questionnaire questions, Cronbach's alpha coefficient was used. Based on the results,the amount of alpha obtained for a variable of social anomie is0/69. Also,all variables have acceptable reliability coefficient. 

Discussion of Results & Conclusions
Based on this research findings, the mean of social anomie in the range of at least 5 and at most 50, is 22/23, which is to say that a feeling of social anomie among moderate to low. Similarly, variables, religious, cultural capital, economic capital, moral illegality and instrumental illegality have been evaluated; the average of each of them, respectively, 34/5, 28/09, 8/71, 10/35 and 15/91 is obtained. inferential findings of the study also shows that five variables, religiosity, moral illegality, instrumental illegality, cultural capital and economic capital, the 99% probability level showed significant correlation with social anomie. But this variables: religiosity (r = 0/231) and cultural capital (r = 0/162) had a negative correlation with social anomie. This is to mean that, the higher the degree of religious feeling and cultural capital among the subjects is high, the amount of social anomie is reduced, and conversely, those who had lower levels of religiosity and cultural capital, social anomie higher level of being.  Moral illegality and Instrumental illegality, and economic capital have a direct correlation with social anomie. This is to mean that, the higher degree of moral illegality, instrumental illegality and economic capital means higher among respondents in the same way as they also had higher levels of social anomie. Especially variable of instrumental illegality with the highest positive correlation (r = 0/43) with the social anomie variable. Most of the people who refuse to obey the law; these people have a higher level of social anomie. Also, a direct and significant economic capital with social anomie is indicating the amount of anomie among the most important economic capital is higher. Results of multivariate regression analysis show that social anomie affecting the instrumental illegality. In other words, instrumental illegality makes the greatest impact on changing social anomie and religiosity had minimal impact on the social anomie. Adjusted coefficient of r indicates that the 32/8 percent of the social anomie is explained with five variables: religiosity, moral illegality, instrumental illegality, cultural capital and economic cultural. Therefore, based on the results obtained in this study, suggest that, given the inverse relationship between cultural capital and religiosity with social anomie, one can enrich the religious spirit and promote initiatives related to cultural capital, social anomie levels in marginalized areas to control and modify.

