Introduction
Order is one of the most important necessities of social life that has numerous functions. In individual level leads to success in achieving the goal and increasing self-esteem and happiness. In organizational level, improving efficiency and in social level, causes to reduce crime,improve security, expansion of pro social behaviors, social cohesion and development. Although everyone in terms of human nature, acknowledges the importance of discipline in life, but in practice, many people are not disciplined. The concept of disorder includes a broad range of features such as confusion, disorganization, disruption, and chaos. In other words, disorder, indicating erosion of values and norms on the one hand and the appearance of environment on the other hand. Disorder is an important social problem especially in urban areas in Iran. As a behavior, disorder influenced by multiple factors, but many researchers believe that there is a significant relationship between social control and disorder. In summary, based on control theory, there is a direct relationship between performance of contol systems and the degree of disorder. In other words, if the systems of social control have more monitor on the behavior of people through formal or informal mechanisms, disorder or deviation from the cultural values and norms will be lower. But this relationship has been rarely considered in Iran. Accordingly, the main objective of this study is to investigate relationship between social control and disorder in Dehdasht as one of the three major cities of Kohgiloye- Boyerahmad  province in south west of Iran.

 
Materials and Methods 
The research is a survey study. The population is all of people more than 18 years old in Dehdasht that its number based on the last census is 56279. Sample size is 400 cases that were selected using random multi-stage sampling method. The measurement tool for disorder is a researcher-made questionnaire using dichotomous values, that consists of 12 items in two dimensions including social (6 items) and physical(6 items). The measurement tool for social control is also a researcher-made questionnaire using 5-points likert scale, that consists of 17 items in two dimensions including formal (9 items) and informal (8 items). Validity of the scales was measured using confirmatory factor analysis technique. Based on the results, the confirmatory factor analysis ultimately led to extract two dimensions in each of the scales with deleting one item in disorder scale and without deleting any item in social control.The KMO test is 0.760 for disorder scale and 0.841 for social control scale. The extracted factors in disorder scale, are able to explain 46.3% of the variance of disorder construct and the extracted factors in social controle can explain 50.2% of the variance of the social control. The reliability of the disorder scale was measured using Kuder-Richardson coefficient,that its amount is 0.66 and the reliability of the social control scale was calculated through Cronbach Ahpha coefficient that its value is 0.81. 

Discussion of Results and Conclusions
In total,400 respondents including 255 (63.8%) males and 145 (36.2%) females answerd the questionnaires.183respondents(45.8%) are single and 217(54.2%) are married. Maen age of respondents is 31.4 years and mean income is 658000 Rials. 25 respondents (6.2%) are less than diploma educationally, 87(21.8%) diploma and 288(72%) are academic. Finally, 393 respondents (98.2%) are Lor ethnically and 7(1.8%) are Farss. On the basis of the results, mean disorder on the range of 0-11 is 1.9 and the mean social control on the range of 17-85 is 50.7. 
   For the purpose of the relationship between social control and disorder, structural equation model was used that the results are shown in Figure 1. 
 




                                                                                  




AGFI=0.96	GFI=0.99	RMSEA=0.007	P-value=0.56	df=1	Chi-square=0.34
Figure 1. Relationship between social control and disorder using Structural equation model.

 
   On the basis of the Figure 1, there is a negative significant relationship between social control and disorder. Social control is able to explain 32% of variance of disorder. Thus, increasing of formal and informal control mechanisms can reduce considerably disorder rates. Research finding, regarding negative relationship between social control and disorder, on the one hand is compatible with theoretical framework of the research and on the other hand compatible with the results of similar studies in Iran and outside of Iran. To clarify the relationship between the social control and disorder, relationship between demographic variables and disorder was investigated that there is a significant relationship between gender, marital status, and age with disorder and there is no significant relationship between ethnicity, income and education level with disorder.

