Introduction & Objective: Vitamins are the most important nutrients that stimulating the immune system of fish. Vitamin C is considered as an essential nutrient in aquaculture. Vitamin C on aquaculture is considered as an essential nutrient. The purpose of this study is to evaluate different levels of vitamin C on blood factors and child safety of Siberian sturgeon (Acipen serbaerii). 
Material and Methods: In this study different levels of the vitamin C of type L - ascorbyl 2 - polyphosphate including  lack of vitamin C (Treatment 1), 100 mg/kg vitamin C (Treatment 2), 200 mg/kg vitamin C (Treatment 3), 400 mg/kg vitamin C (Treatment 4), 800 mg/kg vitamin C(Treatment 5), 1600 mg/kg vitamin C (Treatment 6) in triplicate and grown for 8 weeks,  were considered for breeding Siberian sturgeon. At the end of the experiment, blood and immune parameters were measured. 
Results: Research results indicated the highest of number of red blood cells (RBC) and vitamin C in the blood and immune factors of Siberian sturgeon in the treatment of 200 mg/kg and compared to other the other treatments showed significant differences. While no significant difference in the number of white blood cells (WBC), hematocrit and hemoglobin were observed. But the greatest value in the treatment of 200 mg per kg of vitamin C was common. In others hematologic indices MCH, MCHC showed significant differences among treatments, but statistical differences were observed in MCV levels and the highest amount of vitamin C in the treatment of 1600 ppm was common. Studies on blood safety factors of Siberian sturgeon showed a significant difference in the amount of lysozyme, IgM among treatments. But there is no significant difference between treatments in the total immunoglobulin and lysozyme levels and total immunoglobulin treatment was 800 mg higher than other treatments. Absence of vitamin C in the diet reduces the amount of safety factors.
 Conclusions:, The results showed that high vitamin C  has better effects on  the safety factor . 
Keywords: VitaminC , BLOOD, FACTOR SAFETY, Siberian sturgeon


