Abstract
Inroduction & Objective: Disinfectants, to destroy or disable pathogenic microorganisms such as bacteria, algae, viruses, etc. are used. Performance is a complex function of several variables, a disinfectant, such as the type and amount the material and the type and concentration of microorganisms, contact time, water quality, etc. So, in many cases it's best to choose an appropriate disinfectant, is an in vitro study. The aim of this study was to determine concentrations tolerated by potassium permanganate in fish carp and their impact on the flora of skin and tissue of the gills are. 
Material and Methods: Experiment with 5 treatments and a control (each with three replicates) at the Institute of International Sturgeon doctor Rasht Dadman phenomenon in the summer of 1391. Toxicity Testing in the 25-liter tank, two-thirds filled with water and were aerated for 24 hours, were conducted. weighted average of 10 fish per tank storage was  3.74± 0.45 g. The first, LC10, LC50, LC90 at 96 hours in residence on the 180 grass carp fish concentrations were determined by the logarithmic method. Within 96 hours of the end of the gill tissue was studied histologically.
Results: The results showed that the gills after exposure in the presence of potassium permanganate phenomena such as congestion, adhesions secondary gill filaments and cell necrosis (low), hyperplasia, atrophy of primary and secondary fibers were seen clubbing. After 96 h of exposure to concentrations determined in order to evaluate in terms of total bacteria, CFU skin biopsy was performed. And results in skin samples treated 0.25 milligrams per liter compared with the other treatments and the control of bacteria were lower. 
Conclusion: In general we can say based on LC50 96h, this antiseptic is very toxic to fish carp with respect to the influence of physicochemical factors on the toxicity of these substances on fish, can be in different conditions will show different results.Visitors will be different.
Key words: Grass Carp, Potassium Permanganate, LC50, Histology

