Inroduction & Objective: Peptic ulcer involved mucous extras and good heal under mucous in the wall of stomach. This decease usually is from the most known digest deceases, the plant drugs as compare with the chemical drugs had lower side effects and in contrast of chemical drugs that maybe had interfere with another compounds of  body or produced a poison in the body, hasn’t interfere effects. Melisa officinalis have biologic effects such as calmness and antioxidant effects. In this research studied the effects of hydroalcoholic nectar of leaf of Melisa officinalis plant over the peptic ulcer result of acid acetic on the Rat 
Material and Methods: In this experimental study prepared hydraulic nectar of melisa officinalis plant. 60heads of female mousse in weight of 250-200 divided accidently to four 15groups, control group, Sham group (normal receiver of Salin) experiment1 group (extract of does 200 mg/kg) experiment2 group (extract of does 400 mg/kg). Mousse suffered form peptic ulcer through injection of acid acetic. After a day the rats treated for 14days through nectar process. Then the sample of stomach in the forth, tenth seventh and fourteen days excited and after measuring the sizes of wounds and fitting with formalin 10% , passage stages,  performed tissue cut and coloring method and finally investigated the histology parameters. 
Results: the results showed that the nectar of Melisa officinalis result in meaningful increase of improving the wound in the experiment group 1 and 2 as compare with Sham and control groups, in the experiment group 2 improving the wound as compare with the experiment group 1 had meaningful increase. The inflammation factors and fibroblasts showed the meaningful decrease as compare with control and Sham group and showed meaningful reduction in the next days and the experiment group 2 showed meaningful reduction from froth day.
Conclusion: Melisa officinalis has high recover ability in treatment of peptic ulcer result of acid acetic
 Keywords: Peptic Ulcer, Melisa officinalis, Rat , Histology Parameters

