A micromechanical numerical algorithm to efficiently determine the homogenized elastic properties of bidirectional fibrous composites is presented. A repeating unit cell (RUC) based on a pre-determined bidirectional fiber packing is assumed to represent the microstructure of the composite. For angular bidirectional fiber distribution, the symmetry lines define a parallelepiped unit cell, representing the periodic microstructure of an angular bidirectional fiber composite. The lines of symmetry extrude a volume to capture a three dimensional unit cell. Finite element analysis of this unit cell under six possible independent loading conditions is carried out to study and quantify the homogenized mechanical property of the cell. A volume averaging scheme is implemented to determine the average response as a function of loading in terms of stresses and strains. The individual elastic properties of the constituents’ materials, as well as, the composite can be assumed to be completely isotropic to completely anisotropic. The output of the analysis can determine this degree. The logic behind the selection of the unit cell and the implementation of the periodic boundary conditions as well as the constraints are presented. To verify this micromechanics algorithm, the results for four composites are presented. The results in this paper are mainly focused on the impact of the fiber cross angles on the stiffness properties of the composites chosen. The accuracy of the results from this micromechanics modeling procedure has been compared with the stiffness/compliance solutions from lamination theory. The methodology is to be accurate and efficient to the extent that periodicity of the composite material is maintained. In addition, the results will show the impact of fiber volume fraction on the material properties of the composite. This micromechanics tool could make a powerful viable algorithm for determination of many linear as well as nonlinear properties in continuum mechanics material characterization and analysis.
