 
The human being, as the masterpiece of creation, needs to learn in order to attain optimal perfection. From their early childhood, their existence is the center of some amazing talents and powers that have to be discovered on time and put into practice. So, the appropriate training of children must begin at a time when his mind is pure from any bad experiences. This, in turn, brings about happiness in society and guarantees a good future for children.
From the very beginning, children ask many important questions about the existence of God, meaning of life, death, justice, and freedom. The best method for responding to these questions is resorting to Qur’anic stories.
Since long ago, tales and stories have played a significant role in human life, particularly, in children’s life and in developing their imagination and mental powers. In fact, by telling stories, we can persuade children to speak with each other and to ask some questions from each other.
Children show great interest in stories and are easily influenced by them.  We can indirectly teach correct behavioral patterns to children through story telling. Moreover, through providing some models, we can present religious and educational principles to children very easily and during a short time and, in this way, make them act upon them. This is because they have a very strong sense of imitation. Of course, it is necessary for the model to present an excellent example of moral behavior.
When choosing a story, we must be careful that it does entail any bad teaching. Some false concepts, such as fortune, luck, and chance, and some superstitions, such as bad omen, are harmful to children’s mental development. Stories must reinforce some concepts and ideas such as self-respect, courage, bravery, self-confidence, love of freedom, generosity, etc. in the minds of children. Likewise, the chosen stories cannot suggest some anti-values such as humiliation, submissiveness, and weakness to the children’s mind and soul. In children’s stories, the main purpose should be the expression of the beauty of good things rather than the ugliness of evil things.
 


* Associate Professor, Allameh Tabatabaei University.
 
Tales and stories play a significant role in training human beings, of course, only when they report realities. These true stories greatly influence the moral training of their listeners, particularly, children. The reason is that, upon hearing true propositional news, people become specifically curious to learn about the causes and concomitants of the occurrence of sweet and bitter events to the heroes in stories. Then, through identifying themselves with these heroes, they receive some advice and are enlightened. This kind of instruction will be more profound and influential if it is given through telling true stories entailing living characters and true events. If stories do not present objective realities and turn merely into means of entertainment and reporting historical events, without having any instructive aspects, they will become mainly similar to myths and legends rather than tools of moral education. Because of being true, Qur’anic stories could be efficiently used in any educational and ethical program.





