The objective of this study is to determine the three dimensional kinematics of the human pelvis including both sacroiliac joints following a simulated open book injury induced on cadavers by applying anterior-posterior compressive loads to the pelvis. An electromagnetic digitizing and motion tracking system was utilized to measure the morphology of the pelvis and the relative movements of its bones during this simulated open book fracture. The screw displacement axis method was used to describe the relative motion between the sacrum and each hipbone.

logically, it was found that the articular surfaces forming the sacroiliac joints could be approximated with planar surfaces directed from proximal and lateral to distal and medial and from posteromedial to anterolateral. The kinematic data obtained from this study indicate that there is a direct correlation between the opening of the symphysis pubis and the opening of the sacroiliac joint (SIJ) during open book injury. This suggests that the extent of injury of the SIJ maybe estimated from the degree of opening of the symphysis pubis as demonstrated on anteroposterior (A–P) x-rays. The results obtained from this study also indicate that the motion of the hipbone with respect to the sacrum on the side of the sacroiliac joint opening is almost a pure rotation, which translates clinically on the A–P x-rays as pure opening of the SIJ without vertical displacement. The average axis of rotation was found to be almost parallel to the SIJ planar articular surface. Furthermore, the pubic bone on the side of SIJ opening was found to displace inferiorly and posteriorly. One can thus conclude that in open book pelvic injuries, the pubic bone on the side of injury displaces inferiorly on the outlet projection x-rays with no vertical displacement of the SIJ. This is important since the initial assessment of the open book injury in the emergency room includes outlet projection x-rays. From this study, the relative vertical positions of the pubic bones on these x-rays can help the surgeon in differentiating open book fracture injury from other pelvic injuries.
