Disc swelling pressure (Pswell) facilitated by fixed charged density (FCD) of proteoglycans (Pfcd) and strain-dependent permeability (Pstrain) are of critical significance in the physiological functioning of discs. FCD of proteoglycans prevents any excessive matrix deformation by tissue stiffening, whereas strain-dependent permeability limits the rate of stress transfer from fluid to solid skeleton. To date, studies involving the modeling of FCD of proteoglycans and strain-dependent permeability have not been reported for the cervical discs. The current study objective is to compare the relative contributions of strain-dependent permeability and FCD of proteoglycans in predicting cervical disc biomechanics. Three-dimensional finite element models of a C5–C6 segment with three different disc compositions were analyzed: an SPFP model (strain-dependent permeability and FCD of proteoglycans), an SP model (strain-dependent permeability alone), and an FP model (FCD of proteoglycans alone). The outcomes of the current study suggest that the relative contributions of strain-dependent permeability and FCD of proteoglycans were almost comparable in predicting the physiological behavior of the cervical discs under moment loads. However, under compression, strain-dependent permeability better predicted the in vivo disc response than that of the FCD of proteoglycans. Unlike the FP model (least stiff) in compression, motion behavior of the three models did not vary much from each other and agreed well within the standard deviations of the corresponding in vivo published data. Flexion was recorded with maximum Pfcd and Pstrain, whereas minimum values were found in extension. The study data enhance the understanding of the roles played by the FCD of proteoglycans and strain-dependent permeability and porosity in determining disc tissue swelling behavior. Degenerative changes involving strain-dependent permeability and/or loss of FCD of proteoglycans can further be studied using an SPFP model. Future experiments are necessary to support the current study results.
