The assessment of knee joint laxity is clinically important but its quantification remains elusive. Calibrated, low dosage fluoroscopy, combined with registered surfaces and controlled external loading may offer possible solutions for quantifying relative tibio-femoral motion without soft tissue artefact, even in native joints. The aim of this study was to determine the accuracy of registration using CT and MRI derived 3D bone models, as well as metallic implants, to 2D single-plane fluoroscopic datasets, to assess their suitability for examining knee joint laxity.

adaveric knees and one knee implant were positioned using a micromanipulator. After fluoroscopy, the accuracy of registering each surface to the 2D fluoroscopic images was determined by comparison against known translations from the micromanipulator measurements. Dynamic measurements were also performed to assess the relative tibio-femoral error. For CT and MRI derived 3D femur and tibia models during static testing, the in-plane error was 0.4 mm and 0.9 mm, and out-of-plane error 2.6 mm and 9.3 mm respectively. For metallic implants, the in-plane error was 0.2 mm and out-of-plane error 1.5 mm. The relative tibio-femoral error during dynamic measurements was 0.9 mm, 1.2 mm and 0.7 mm in-plane, and 3.9 mm, 10.4 mm and 2.5 mm out-of-plane for CT and MRI based models and metallic implants respectively. The rotational errors ranged from 0.5° to 1.9° for CT, 0.5–4.3° for MRI and 0.1–0.8° for metallic implants.

sults of this study indicate that single-plane fluoroscopic analysis can provide accurate information in the investigation of knee joint laxity, but should be limited to static or quasi-static evaluations when assessing native bones, where possible. With this knowledge of registration accuracy, targeted approaches for the determination of tibio-femoral laxity could now determine objective in vivo measures for the identification of ligament reconstruction candidates as well as improve our understanding of the consequences of knee joint instability in TKA.
