Long lasting insecticide treated nets (LLINs) that require no re-treatment have been advocated as an effective tool against malaria transmission. However, success of this community based intervention measure largely depends on its acceptability and proper usage by the target population, besides assuring access to bed nets. To determine the acceptability of LLIN, its usage and people's willingness to buy the net, a study was conducted in two tribal districts viz., Malkangiri (with ongoing ITN programme) and Koraput (no ITN programme) of Orissa State, India. Both qualitative and quantitative data collection methods were used to collect information regarding the objective of the study. A total of 2457 LLINs (Olyset Nets) were distributed in the selected villages of these districts at free of cost. In the study villages of Malkangiri, 58% of the households had either ITNs (73%) or other types of mosquito nets aside from the LLINs and in the villages of Koraput, only 8% had other nets, as majority (96%) informed that buying nets from market was not affordable to them. Physical verification of the nets during the house visits revealed that 75.4% and 83% (in ITNs and non-ITNs villages, respectively) of the LLINs and 76% of the other nets (including ITNs) were used by the respondents, the night before the survey as nets were in a hanging position at the time of the visit. Majority of the respondents (76–98%) felt that reduction of mosquito bites as the main perceived benefit of using the LLINs. About 55% and 67% of the respondents from non-ITNs and ITNs areas, respectively, expressed their willingness to buy the LLINs. Among them, 76.8% and 94.7% offered to pay INR &lt; 100 for a net and also ready to buy it by cash payment. Social marketing of LLINs at a subsidized price or free supply to the deserving sections of people (socially/economically poor and/or under-privileged) and ensuring the availability of nets during harvesting season could encourage people to buy and use LLINs.
