Abstract 
Objective: The present study was carried out to compare the learning effect of Fernald's multi-sensory approach and Sina’s approach on improving reading skills in bilingual students with reading disorders who were studying in the second and third grade of elementary school in Urmia.
Methods: An experimental study with a control group of pre–test post–test design was conducted. A sample comprising 48 dyslexic students were selected randomly from all second and third grade bilingual & dyslexic students of Urmia. Since the Wechsler's Intelligence Test and reading test were carried out, the sample was randomly divided into one experimental and one control group. These two experimental groups were randomly assigned to individual training for 3 months of fifteen 45–minute sessions using Fernald's multi–sensory approach and Sina’s approach. The reading errors of these three groups were compared in pre–test and post–test using the analysis of covariance.
Results: A significant difference was observed in these two grades between the two dependent variables (reduction in the number of errors, reduction in substitution errors, reduction in word deletions, increase in reading speed, increase in reading comprehension) and independent variables (Fernald's multi–sensory approach and Sina’s approach). Holding the variable of intelligence constant, Sina’s teaching method caused an increase in reading comprehension and a decrease in word deletion errors in second graders. Fernald's multi–sensory approach caused a reduction in the number of errors and a decrease in substitution errors in bilingual dyslexic students. In third graders the application of Sina’s approach caused an increase in reading comprehension, increase in reading speed and a reduction in substitution error. Application of Fernald's method caused a reduction in the number of errors and a reduction in word deletion in these students.
Conclusions: Bearing in mind the favorable effects observed in the application of these two teaching methods, teachers can apply these two methods to improve their students' reading skills.

