Abstract
Objective: The purpose of this study was determinning / identifying the barriers to disabled peoples employment and providing rehabilitation policy makers guidelines to confront these barriers.
Materials & Methods: Twenty people with physical disabilities, ten  people of their families and ten Rehabilitation managers / personnel who deal with the disabled people were chosen. Barriers of employment were identified via interview. Bycontent analysis of the interviews, a questionnaire was regulated and questionnaire distributed among 437 people with physical disabilities who were randomly selected. In order to determine the validity of the questionnaire Rosenberg self-esteem scale with barriers to employment questionnaire distributed and the validity coefficient was 0.71(P < 0.05) . To evaluate the reliability of questionnaire, Cronbach’s alpha was used and Cronbach’s alpha coefficients economic barriers (0.74), attitud barriers (0.69), educational barriers (0.77),  Laws barriers (0.76) and physical barriers (0.71) obtained.
Results: 43as an impediment to the employment of people with motor disabilities were identified and closely related to the concepts of the material, in the form of five factors including economic barriers, attitudinal, educational, environmental and legal were classified. Confirmatoryf actor analysisr evealed that 43of these 5 factors are composed of material and all have significant effects on the factors related to them. All these factors were significant in the level (P < 0.05). The attitudinal barriers was the least important and the physical and enviromental barriers was main and the gender of peoples is minor factors and inappropriate streets and sidewalks and buildings. The negative attitude of distrust towards the empowerment of persons with disabilities was importance factors.
Conclusion: According to the results, it was found that people with motor disabilities faces barriers in employment with five kind of (economic , attitud, education,  Laws , physical) barriers. This study discuss solutions for eliminating these barriers and provide guidance for rehabilitation policy makers.

