Introduction: Researches indicate that children's pain is still not managed well. Pain relief with non pharmaceutical methods in addition to being cost effective it is uninvasive and it only depends on nurses' performance.                                                                                                                 
Objective: This study aims to determine important barriers and presented interventions by nurses for non pharmaceutical pain management in children. 
 Methods: This descriptive study was conducted in all nurses of medical-surgical wards (50 nurses) in Tabriz educational-therapeutic hospital in 2010. Data collection instrument included a researcher made questionnaire that the first part covered nurses' demographics, second part contained items (20 questions) on problems and barriers of using non- pharmaceutical methods from nurses' viewpoints and the third part included items (20 questions) on pain management strategies . Questions were ranked on a 3-point Likert scale.  Questionnaire was used after determining its validity and reliability. The data were statistically analyzed utilizing descriptive and Pearson correlational analytic statistics.                                                                                              
Results: Nurses considered the following important barriers respectively:  frequency of working hours (2.84±0.3), Lack of time and heavy work load (2.76±0.5), staff shortages (2.72±0.5). And they mentioned the following important strategies respectively: increase the number of personnel (2.82±0.4), parent education to understand and apply these methods (2.78±0.4), personnel education to improve communication skills with children (2.76±0.5).
Conclusion: Study findings showed nurses evaluate many alternatives in personnel, training, management and environmental domains in order to manage pain properly by non- pharmaceutical methods. Data analysis indicated that the best alternative is to increase the number of personnel. Therefore, it's suggested that managers and professional staff use these strategies to solve problems.
