This review discusses the development and therapeutic potential of prototype macromolecular drugs for use in cancer chemotherapy, in particular the development and use of SMANCS, a conjugate of neocarzinostatin and poly(styrene-comaleic acid). The various topics covered include a brief description of the chemistry and polymer conjugation, the binding of the conjugate to albumin and the biological behaviour in vitro and in vivo after arterial injection in animals, including plasma half-life, and the lipid solubility of SMANCS in medium chain triglycerides and Lipiodol, a lipid contrast medium suitable for use in X-ray-computed tomography. The biological response-modifying effects and the tumor-targeting mechanism of SMANCS and other macromolecular drugs are also discussed. The latter mechanism is accounted for in terms of a tumor ‘enhanced permeability and retention’ (or EPR) effect. A principal advantage in the use of SMANCS or other macromolecular drugs is the potential for a reduction or elimination of toxicity. Macromolecular drugs such as a pyran copolymer–NCS conjugate show a marked reduction in bone marrow toxicity normally associated with the use of NCS. This is believed to be due to a hypothetical blood–bone marrow ‘barrier’ which, relative to NCS, restricts or limits access of the macromolecular drug to the bone marrow. In addition, the clinical possibilities for SMANCS are discussed, including the suggestion that angiotensin II-induced hypertension has clinical potential in improving the selective delivery of macromolecular drugs (i.e. SMANCS) to tumors. Aqueous SMANCS formulations have been tested in pilot studies in patients with solid tumors of the ovary, esophagus, lung, stomach, adrenal gland and in the brain. Formulations based on SMANCS/Lipiodol have been shown to be effective both as a diagnostic tool and for therapeutic use in solid tumors where the formulations are given arterially via a catheter. In a pilot study in primary unresectable hepatoma, an objective reduction in tumor size was observed for about 90% of cases when an adequate amount of the macromolecular drug was administered. A patient receiving such treatment with no active liver cirrhosis and tumor nodules/lesion confined within one liver segment might expect to have a 90% chance of survival after treatment for at least 5 years.
