The objective of this study was to determine the surface free energy components of aqueous-based cellulose ether films and compare these values with those of other cellulose polymers. The surface free energy parameters were calculated from the contact angles of sessile drops of apolar and polar liquids on cellulose ether films cast on glass slides using the Lifshitz–van der Waals/acid–base (LW/AB) approach according to the method of van Oss, Chaudhury and Good. The cellulose ethers studied were hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC), methylcellulose (MC), hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC) and hydroxyethyl cellulose (HEC). The total surface free energy of these cellulose ethers ranged from 42 to 50 mJ m−2. The contribution of the acid–base (AB) component of surface free energy to the total surface free energy of the polymers ranged from 4 to 12%, which was considerably lower than that of cellulose. The cellulose ethers demonstrated near monopolarity and had dominant electron donor (Lewis-base) character. The overall trend in the values of the thermodynamic terms derived from the surface free energy parameters as indicators of hydrophilicity and hydration were in good agreement with the relative bulk solubility and hydration behavior of the polymers. Independent estimates of the AB character of the polymers from work of adhesion terms calculated from the liquid wetting data agreed with those obtained from the surface free energy parameters. Calculation of the work of adhesion with substrates of varying surface free energy parameters indicated that acid–base interactions made a major contribution to the total work of adhesion between cellulose ethers and bipolar surfaces. Although no direct correlation could be established between the surface free energy parameters and the type of substitution on the cellulose backbone for the cellulose ethers, the values of the terms derived from the LW/AB approach were consistent with those of cellulose and ethylcellulose. The LW/AB approach provides a reasonably consistent method for estimating the surface properties of cellulose ethers and the resulting surface free energy parameters are shown to relate to the interfacial properties of the polymers.
