Introduction: Blended learning, a new approach in educational planning, is
defined as an applying more than one method, strategy, technique or media
in education. Todays, due to the development of infrastructure of Internet
networks and the access of most of the students, the Internet can be utilized
along with traditional and conventional methods of training. The aim of this
study was to compare the students’ learning and satisfaction in combination of
lecture and e-learning with conventional lecture methods.
Methods: This quasi-experimental study is conducted among the sophomore
students of Public Health School, Tehran University of Medical Science in 2012-
2013. Four classes of the school are randomly selected and are divided into
two groups. Education in two classes (45 students) was in the form of lecture
method and in the other two classes (48 students) was blended method with
e-Learning and lecture methods. The students’ knowledge about tuberculosis in
two groups was collected and measured by using pre and post-test. This step has
been done by sending self-reported electronic questionnaires to the students'
email addresses through Google Document software. At the end of educational
programs, students' satisfaction and comments about two methods were also
collected by questionnaires. Statistical tests such as descriptive methods, paired
t-test, independent t-test and ANOVA were done through the SPSS 14 software,
and p?0.05 was considered as significant difference.
Results: The mean scores of the lecture and blended groups were 13.18±1.37
and 13.35±1.36, respectively; the difference between the pre-test scores of
the two groups was not statistically significant (p=0.535). Knowledge scores
increased in both groups after training, and the mean and standard deviation
of knowledge scores of the lectures and combined groups were 16.51±0.69
and 16.18±1.06, respectively. The difference between the post-test scores of the
two groups was not statistically significant (p=0.112). Students’ satisfaction in
blended learning method was higher than lecture method.
Conclusion: The results revealed that the blended method is effective in
increasing the students' learning rate. E-learning can be used to teach some
courses and might be considered as economic aspects. Since in universities of
medical sciences in the country, the majority of students have access to the
Internet and email address, using e-learning could be used as a supplement to
traditional teaching methods or sometimes as educational alternative method
because this method of teaching increases the students’ knowledge, satisfaction
and attention.
