Objective: Molecular genetic methods have significantly contributed to the knowledge about the microbiota associated with infected root canals. Albeit spirochetes have been commonly observed in primary root canal infections, only recently they have been identified. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the occurrence of four treponemes—Treponema maltophilum, Treponema lecithinolyticum, Treponema amylovorum, and Treponema medium—in cases of primary endodontic infections associated with different forms of periradicular diseases through a 16S rDNA-based nested PCR assay. Design: Samples were taken from thirty-one infected root canals associated with either asymptomatic or symptomatic apical periodontitis. DNA extracted from the samples was initially amplified using universal 16S rDNA primers, followed by a second round of amplification using the first PCR products to detect a specific fragment of the 16S rDNA of each target Treponema species. Results: All cases were positive for the universal bacterial primers, indicating that samples contained bacterial DNA. Of the four target species, T. maltophilum was the most prevalent, being detected in 39% of the cases (33% of the asymptomatic cases and 50% of the symptomatic cases). T. lecithinolyticum was the next more prevalent among the species tested, being found in 26% of the samples (33% of asymptomatic cases and 10% of the symptomatic cases). T. amylovorum was found in 7% of the cases (5% of the asymptomatic cases and 10% of the symptomatic cases), while T. medium was in 13% of the cases (14% of the asymptomatic cases and 10% of the symptomatic cases). None of the species tested was significantly associated with clinical symptoms. Conclusions: This was possibly the hitherto first study to report the occurrence of T. lecithinolyticum, T. amylovorum, and T. medium in infections of endodontic origin. Overall, findings suggested that these oral treponemes, particularly T. maltophilum and T. lecithinolyticum, can be involved in the pathogenesis of periradicular diseases.
