Human tissue factor (TF) is involved in tumor angiogenesis and metastasis. However, little is known about the distribution of TF in urological cancer. In this study we investigated the TF expression in tumor tissue and autologous non-malignant tissue as well as in serum of patients with renal cell carcinoma (RCC), bladder cancer, and prostate cancer (PCa). To study the distribution of TF in tumor tissue and in the surrounding non-malignant tissue, we measured TF protein by ELISA in tissue specimens obtained intraoperatively from 18 RCC, seven bladder cancer and six PCa patients. Differences in TF expression were found between tumor tissue and nonmalignant tissue for the three tumor types at the protein level (in the order RCC &lt; bladder cancer &lt; PCa). In all but one of the 18 RCC patients (94 %) higher TF protein level was observed in non-malignant tissue as compared to the tumor tissue. In addition, the relative TF mRNA expression analyzed by a quantitative RT-PCR assay in the same RCC tissue sample pairs was higher in 78% of non-malignant tissues in comparison to the tumor tissue specimens. Moreover, using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay the TF protein content was measured in serum samples of 66 patients with bladder cancer, 75 RCC patients and 157 PCa patients, and was compared with the TF serum level of 92 healthy volunteers. Whereas no differences were detected between normal volunteers and patients with PCa or RCC, patients with bladder cancer showed a significantly increased level of serum TF (P=0.0076). However, no causal association between TF levels in serum and TF content in tissue extracts for all three tumor types of urological tumors was found. Our results suggest that TF in non-malignant renal tissues was expressed at a higher level compared to the supposed de novo TF expression in RCC tissue specimens. This indicates a tumor-associated induction of TF expression in the TF-negative RCC progenitor cells. The increased serum TF levels are alike the reported higher urinary TF levels found in bladder cancer patients. The potential clinical relevance of this finding should be further elucidated.
