Objective
periodontal ligament fibroblasts (HPDLFs) play a crucial role in protecting against oral bacteria in periapical tissue. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD) are two major forms of innate immune sensors that recognize microbial pathogens and initiate pro-inflammatory signalling. Tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) is an adapter protein for TLR-mediated nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) signalling pathway activation that induces the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of TLR2, TLR4, NOD1, and NOD2 in HPDLFs. We also investigated the expression of TRAF6 and pro-inflammatory cytokines induced by the activation of TLRs and NODs.
s
pression of TLR2, TLR4, NOD1, and NOD2 was measured by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), flow cytometry, and immunostaining. HPDLFs were stimulated with TLR and NOD agonists. Then, the expression of TRAF6 was measured by real-time PCR and western blot. Concentrations of IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-8 in the culture supernatants were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Finally, by using small interfering RNA (siRNA) for TRAF6, we analysed the production of IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-8 in HPDLFs upon stimulation with TLRs and NODs agonists.
s
nd clear mRNA and protein expression of TLR2, TLR4, NOD1, and NOD2 in HPDLFs. The expression levels of TRAF6 and pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-8) were markedly up-regulated upon the activation of TLRs and NODs. Furthermore, the co-activation of TLRs and NODs had synergistic effect on the production of TRAF6 and pro-inflammatory cytokines. We also found TRAF6 suppression resulted in reduced IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-8 expression upon TLR and NOD agonists challenge.
sion
findings indicated that TLR2, TLR4, NOD1, and NOD2 are functional receptors in HPDLFs during innate immune responses to invading bacteria, and a combination of signalling through TLRs and NODs leads to the synergistic enhancement of inflammatory reactions in HPDLFs. In addition, TLR and NOD signalling involving TRAF6 contribute to inflammatory responses in HPDLFs.
