Objective
ontitis is an inflammatory disease that affects connective tissue attachments and the supporting bone that surrounds the teeth. Gingival fibroblasts induce the overexpression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP), which is involved in inflammatory progression in periodontitis. Osteoclasts are responsible for skeletal modeling and remodeling but may also destroy bone in several bone diseases, including osteoporosis and periodontitis. This study examined the anti-destructive effects of myricetin on human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) under lipopolysaccharide- (LPS-) induced inflammatory conditions, and the anti-osteoclastogenetic effect of myricetin on the receptor activator of NF-κB ligand (RANKL) induced RAW264.7 cells was also investigated.

fects of myricetin on HGF were determined by measuring the cell viability and mRNA expression and enzyme activity of tissue-destructive proteins, including MMP-1, MMP-2 and MMP-8. The effects of myricetin on osteoclasts were examined by measuring the following: (1) the cell viability, (2) the formation of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP)(+) multinucleated cells, (3) MAPK signalling pathways (4) mRNA expression of osteoclast-associated genes and (5) tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interleukin-1β (IL-1β) secretion.
s
ricetin had no effects on the cell viability of the HGF and decreased the mRNA expression and enzyme activity of MMP-1, MMP-2 and MMP-8 in the HGF. Myricetin inhibited the formation of RANKL-stimulated TRAP(+) multinucleated cells. Myricetin also inhibited the RANKL-stimulated activation of p-38, ERK and cSrc signaling, and inhibited the RANKL-stimulated degradation of IkB in the RAW264.7 cells. In addition, the RANKL-stimulated induction of NFATc1 transcription factors was abrogated by myricetin. Myricetin decreased the mRNA expression of osteoclast-associated genes, including cFOS, TRAP and cathepsin K in the RAW264.7 cells. Myricetin inhibited the secretion of LPS-induced TNF-α and IL-1β in the RAW264.7 cells.
sions
findings suggest that myricetin has therapeutic effects on bone-destructive processes, such as those that occur in periodontal diseases.
