Objective
chanism for tooth extraction induced residual alveolar ridge reduction (RRR) during adolescence is poorly understood. This study investigated the alveolar bone morphology, growth, resorption and functional loading at normal and extraction sites using an adolescent pig model.

n 3-month-old pigs were divided into two groups – immediate post-extraction (IE) and 6-week post-extraction (SE). The IE group received an extraction of one deciduous mandibular molar, immediately followed by a final experiment to record masseter muscle EMGs and strains from the buccal surface of the extraction and contralateral non-extraction sites during function (mastication). The SE group was given the same tooth extraction, then kept for 6 weeks before the same final functional recording as the IE group. Both groups also received baseline (pre-extraction) EMGs and fluorescent vital stains 10 and 3 days before the final functional recording. Immediately after the final functional recording, animals were euthanized and alveolar bone specimens from extraction and contralateral non-extraction sites were collected and used to analyse alveolar bone morphology, apposition and resorption based on fluorescent and hematoxylin and eosin stained histological sections.
s
trol sites (IE-extraction, IE-non-extraction and SE-non-extraction), the alveolar ridges grew gingivally and buccally. Bone formation characterized the buccal surface and lingual bundle bone, whereas resorption characterized the lingual surface and buccal bundle bone. The SE-extraction sites showed three major alterations: convergence of the buccal and lingual gingival crests, loss of apposition on the lingual bundle bone, and decelerated growth at the entire buccal surface. These alterations likely resulted from redirected crestal growth as part of the socket healing process, loss of tongue pressure to the lingual side of the teeth which normally provides mechanical stimulation for dental arch expansion, and masticatory underloading during the initial post-extraction period, respectively.
sions
data indicate that the initial phase of RRR in adolescents is a product of modified growth, not resorption, possibly because of decreased mechanical stimulation at the extraction site.
