Objective
rpose of this study was to evaluate cartilage defect at medial femoral condyle on MRI in early osteoarthritis and to compare with early osteoarthritis with meniscal tear without clear cartilage defect.
als and Methods
 patients with medial pain of the knee and cartilage defect without meniscal tear by MRI were studied for cartilage defect. There were two males and 10 females with cartilage defect, and they were between 42 and 61 years of age (average, 51.6). Fifteen patients with medial pain of the knee and meniscal tear and without clear cartilage defect had been studied as meniscal tear cases. There were five males and 10 females with meniscal tear, and they were between 45 and 61 years of age (average 54.5). In both groups, knee injuries by trauma and Kellgren radiographic grade III and IV osteoarthritis were excluded.

pared cartilage defect cases and meniscal tear cases by gender, age, medial meniscus displacement ratio from the edge of the tibial medial joint surface, femorotibial angle (FTA) and Mikulicz line. We measured medial meniscus displacement ratio by the proportion of medial meniscus lesion protruding from the edge of tibial medial joint surface to all the medial meniscus width on MRI. For the evaluation of Mikulicz line, we measured the score by the length from tibial medial joint surface to Mikulicz line to tibial plateau width.

t was used for gender, and Mann–Whitney U test was used for age, medial meniscus displacement ratio, FTA and Mikulicz line.
s
tically significant difference was not observed between cartilage defect cases and meniscal tear cases for age and gender. Medial meniscus displacement ratio was 13±12.3% in cartilage defect cases and 50.4±20.1% in meniscal tear cases. Medial meniscus displacement ratio in cartilage defect cases was significantly smaller than in meniscal tear cases (P=.0001). FTA was 174.9±2.2° in cartilage defect cases and 178.3±4.8° in meniscal tear cases.

 cartilage defect cases was significantly smaller than in meniscal tear cases (P=.00390). The score by the length from tibial medial joint surface to Mikulicz line to tibial plateau width was 35.8±11.8% in cartilage defect cases and 21.7±15.8% in meniscal tear cases. Mikulicz line in cartilage defect cases passes more laterally than in meniscal tear cases significantly (P=.0264).
sion
s study, we reported cartilage defect cases at medial femoral condyle in the early osteoarthritis of the knee. We think that these cases were different from early osteoarthritis with meniscal tear in alignment of lower limb and onset mechanism.

necessary to evaluate meniscus and cartilage in MRI when we diagnose middle-aged patients with medial pain of the knee and without remarkable changes of X-ray.
