SummaryObjective
zed texture analysis of breast tissue on mammograms is an issue of major importance in mass characterization. However, in contrast to other mammographic diagnostic approaches, it has not been investigated in depth, due to its inherent difficulty and fuzziness. This work aims to the establishment of a quantitative approach of mammographic masses texture classification, based on advanced classifier architectures and supported by fractal analysis of the dataset of the extracted textural features. Additionally, a comparison of the information content of the proposed feature set with that of the qualitative characteristics used in clinical practice by expert radiologists is presented.
s and material
ensive set of textural feature functions was applied to a set of 130 digitized mammograms, in multiple configurations and scales, constructing compact datasets of textural “signatures” for benign and malignant cases of tumors. These quantitative textural datasets were subsequently studied against a set of a thorough and compact list of qualitative texture descriptions of breast mass tissue, normally considered under a typical clinical assessment, in order to investigate the discriminating value and the statistical correlation between the two sets. Fractal analysis was employed to compare the information content and dimensionality of the textural features datasets with the qualitative information provided through medical diagnosis. A wide range of linear and non-linear classification architectures was employed, including linear discriminant analysis (LDA), least-squares minimum distance (LSMD), K-nearest-neighbors (K-nn), radial basis function (RBF) and multi-layer perceptron (MLP) artificial neural network (ANN), as well as support vector machine (SVM) classifiers. The classification process was used as the means to evaluate the inherent quality and informational content of each of the datasets, as well as the objective performance of each of the classifiers themselves in real classification of mammographic breast tumors against verified diagnosis.
s
al features extracted at larger scales and sampling box sizes proved to be more content-rich than their equivalents at smaller scales and sizes. Fractal analysis on the dimensionality of the textural datasets verified that reduced subsets of optimal feature combinations can describe the original feature space adequately for classification purposes and at least the same detail and quality as the list of qualitative texture descriptions provided by a human expert. Non-linear classifiers, especially SVMs, have been proven superior to any linear equivalent. Breast mass classification of mammograms, based only on textural features, achieved an optimal score of 83.9%, through SVM classifiers.
