Abstract
Background: Internet is one of new communication technologies which have many benefits for achieving scientific, research, leisure… goals in nowadays social life of people; but improper use of this communication technology has led to some social damages. Internet addiction and also some security problems are considered as damages caused by improper use of this technology. On the other hand, the family as an effective organization could have an effective role in reducing mentioned damages and play a useful role in the social development process and socialization of youth.
Objective: This study has aimed to investigate the relation between family factors and internet addiction and damages caused by it among young people residing in Yazd. 
Method: This is a survey study and its statistical population is age group between 15 to 30 years old residing in Yazd. The sample size was calculated by using Cochran formula 384 people and data was gathered by using multi stage cluster sampling.
Findings: The results showed that there is a significant relationship between family values, parental social control, family social support, parental education and parental awareness of communication technologies with damages caused by improper use of internet (p  <  0.001). One way ANOVA results also showed that parental social control, parental awareness of communication technologies, father education, family income and gender variables respectively, have had the most significant role in predicting variable (internet addiction).
Conclusion: Paying attention to the family is one of the main requirements of reducing social damages. The results showed that the family can play its role in order to prevent children vulnerability in the field of internet addiction with strengthening family values, social support of children and appropriate social control; so efforts about making culture of proper use of internet in families, raising awareness of families and paying attention to the leisure needs of youth have a considerable importance.

