Revising the student selection methods for undergraduate course in architecture and urban planning in Iran is the main objective of this research. The literature on the subject showed that despite numerous general sources on student selection and access to higher education, only a very limited number of sources have addressed the particular cases of architecture and urban planning. There were some indications in the literature about the intervening impacts of non-academic factors, and therefore it seemed necessary to include investigations into both academic and non-academic issues and their consequences. For architecture courses, poor relationship was usually observed between the selection criteria and measures of academic performance of the selected students. There are also some evidences indicating psychological and cognitive differences between students of design and non-design disciplines also modest evidence was found about the relationship of non-academic factors to academic performance. After studying the literature on this matter, attempts have been made to develop new suggestions for the improvement of these processes through investigation of the same processes in other countries worldwide. In this regard, using a comparative method for the research, a sample of nine countries has been chosen so that they could represent a wide range of possible processes of student selection criteria. The sample includes the following countries, which in alphabetical order include Brazil, China, France, India, Korea, Malaysia, Turkey, UK, and USA. Apart from countries, which employ a central unified method of student selection, in other countries where the universities are independently responsible for choosing the candidates, 20 well-known universities were investigated. Six criteria were chosen on the basis of literature review to study the process of student selection namely: selection method (centralized or decentralized), necessary credentials, method of implementation of entrance exam, entrance exams' subjects, method of evaluating previous skills/achievements, authorities/ organizations involved in student selection. Either the results of the study show that a unified central method is only carried out in two countries, whereas in other sample countries the universities are independent, or the process of decentralization of selection method has just started. In the majority of the sample countries the GPA (Grade Point Average) of secondary education is considered as one of the main criteria for student selection, however, in some cases a national exam is also being employed. It should be noticed that in half of the sample countries non-academic factors such as interviews, portfolios and personal statements comprise a key part of the selection criteria. Based on the results, suggestions have been made to enhance the current conditions of selecting architecture and urban planning students in Iran and some of which include: decentralization of student selection procedure, introducing drawing and design tasks in the entrance exams for architecture and design-related urban programs as well as determining threshold scores for each subject of the entrance exam.
