Objective:
thiouracil (PTU) could induce MPO-ANCA-positive vasculitis. The aim of this study was to compare the IgG subclass distribution and avidity of MPO-ANCA in sera from patients with primary ANCA-associated vasculitis (AASV) and PTU-induced vasculitis.
s:
en patients with primary AASV with MPO-ANCA and thirteen patients with PTU-induced vasculitis were enrolled in the current study. Sera in both active phase and remission were collected. Anti-MPO IgG subclasses were detected by antigen specific ELISAs using specific monoclonal antibodies as second antibodies, and MPO-ANCA avidity was assessed by antigen-inhibition ELISAs.
s:
mary AASV, all four anti-MPO IgG subclasses could be detected in active phase with IgG1 (100%), IgG2 (73.7%), IgG3 (63.2%) and IgG4 (94.7%), and in remission, IgG1 and IgG4 subclasses in most patients remained positive. However, in PTU-induced vasculitis, anti-MPO IgG3 subclass could not be detected, the anti-MPO IgG subclasses in active phase were IgG1 (100%), IgG2 (61.5%) and IgG4 (46.2%). Furthermore, five out of the six patients (88.8%) with PTU-induced vasculitis with positive IgG4 subclass in active phase turned to negative in remission, however, only eight out of the fourteen patients (57.1%) with primary AASV turned to negative. The median avidity constant of MPO-ANCA was 56 (8.96 to &gt;140) × 107 mol/l for patients with primary AASV and 0.7 (&lt;0.28 to &gt;140) × 107 mol/l for patients with PTU-induced vasculitis respectively. Furthermore, the relative levels of MPO-ANCA avidity were associated with elevation of ESR in primary AASV and were associated with BVAS scores in patients with PTU-induced vasculitis, respectively.
sion:
CA IgG subclass distribution and avidity were different between patients with primary AASV and PTU-induced vasculitis. It was suggested that the mechanism of ANCA production in PTU-induced vasculitis was different from that in primary AASV, and the avidity of MPO-ANCA might be associated with disease activity.
