Although human T cells have been shown to regulate humoral immune responses by directly inhibiting B cells, the precise sequelae for the mechanism of suppression have not yet been delineated. The present study was therefore examined to explore the nature of T cell–B cell collaboration to suppress B cell responses. Special attention was directed to the roles of Fas (CD95)–Fas ligand (FasL) interactions and CD40–CD40 ligand (CD40L) interactions. The suppressive activity was assessed by the effects of mitomycin C untreated CD4+ T cells (control CD4+ T cells) activated by immobilized anti-CD3 for 72 h on the production of IgM and IgG of B cells stimulated for 72 h with immobilized anti-CD3-activated mitomycin C treated CD4+ T cells. In this model system, B cells stimulated with anti-CD3-activated CD4+ T cells have been shown to express functional Fas receptor. Thus, anti-Fas mAb CH11 inhibited the production of IgM and IgG induced by anti-CD3-activated mitomycin C treated CD4+ T cells in a manner that was completely reversed by a neutralizing anti-Fas mAb ZB4. However, neither ZB4 nor anti-FasL mAb reversed the suppression of B cell responses by anti-CD3-activated control CD4+ T cells. Anti-CD40L mAb inhibited the production of IgM and IgG stimulated with anti-CD3-activated mitomycin C treated CD4+ T cells when it was added at the initiation of cultures. By contrast, anti-CD40L mAb markedly reversed the suppression of B cell production of IgM and IgG by anti-CD3-activated control CD4+ T cells when it was added after 72 h from the initiation of cultures. Consistently, the extent and intensity of CD40L on anti-CD3-stimulated CD4+ T cells declined upon treatment with mitomycin C in parallel with the loss of suppressive activities on B cell responses. These results indicate that signals achieved by direct interactions through CD40–CD40L exert bidirectional effects on the outcome of humoral immune responses depending on the state of activation of B cells and on the extent of CD40 ligation. Moreover, the data suggest that CD40–CD40L interactions rather than Fas–FasL interactions may play more critical roles in direct cellular collaboration between B cells and anti-CD3 stimulated CD4+ T cells to prevent the extension of responses of inappropriately activated B cells.
