OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of attendance at an outpatient pulmonary rehabilitation (OPR) program on changes in self-efficacy, perception of dyspnea, and exercise endurance in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

: Single-group, pretest and posttest design.

G: A moderate sized, urban private hospital in western New York.

TS: Sixty patients with a diagnosis of COPD. Their ages ranged from 35 to 82 years (mean ± SD = 65 ± 0.75 years).

E MEASURE: Scores on the COPD Self-Efficacy Scale (CSES) and the Dyspnea Scale and distance walked (feet) on the 12-minute walking-distance test (12 MD).

ENTION: The OPR consisted of an educational component and exercise training. Methods to increase self-efficacy were integrated into the rehabilitation program. Preprogram and postprogram measurements were obtained on the CSES, the Dyspnea Scale, and the 12 MD.

S: Paired t tests were used to examine the differences in mean scores between preprogram and postprogram results on the CSES, the Dyspnea Scale, and the 12 MD. There was a significant difference between preprogram and postprogram scores on the CSES (p &lt; 0.01), the Dyspnea Scale (p = 0.01), and the 12 MD (p = 0.04). Pearson product moment correlations showed a significant negative correlation between scores on the CSES and scores on the Dyspnea Scale (r =−0.5566, p = 0.01) and a positive correlation between scores on the CSES and the 12 MD (r = 0.4293, p = 0.05). These results indicated that higher self-efficacy scores on the CSES were correlated with lowered perception of dyspnea and greater distances walked in 12 minutes.

SIONS: An OPR can improve self-efficacy or confidence in participants'ability to manage or avoid breathing difficulty. Improvement in self-efficacy also may be a factor in decreased perception of dyspnea and increased exercise endurance. Methods to increase self-efficacy expectations with education and exercise training provide an approach to assist persons with COPD to manage their breathing difficulty more effectively. Further studies using a randomized experimental, control design are needed to provide more conclusive direction with regard to effective methods in pulmonary rehabilitation. (Heart Lung® 1997; 26: 15–22.)
