Objective: To examine functional status outcomes among patients with a coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) over time (ie, at baseline; 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months after surgery) and the impact of selected patient characteristics (ie, age, sex, comorbidities, and cardiac rehabilitation participation) on functional outcomes. Design: A prospective, repeated-measures design was used to examine functional status in patients with a CABG over time. Setting: A midwestern community hospital and regional cardiac referral center was the setting for enrolling patients with a CABG. Outcome Measures: Functional status outcomes were measured by using the Medical Outcomes Study (MOS) Short Form 36 (SF-36) and Modified 7-Day Activity instruments. Methods: Baseline data were obtained by patient interview in the hospital setting after CABG surgery. At 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months after surgery, telephone interviews were conducted to administer research instruments. Results: Baseline scores on 7 of the 8 subscales of the MOS SF-36 were significantly lower than at 3 months, 6 months, or 12 months after surgery. Role-emotional functioning baseline scores were not significantly lower than 3-month scores; however, baseline scores were significantly lower than 6-month and 12-month scores. Three-month subscale scores were also significantly lower than 6-month or 12-month scores except for the subscales measuring social and general health functioning. Functional status as measured by the Modified 7-Day Activity tool did not demonstrate any significant differences between 3-month, 6-month, or 12-month activity levels. There were no significant differences by age group on any of the 8 subscales of the MOS SF-36 instrument. Women and subjects with more than 1 comorbidity had a significantly lower preoperative level of physical functioning. Cardiac rehabilitation participants had lower preoperative scores on role-emotional functioning than subjects who were not in rehabilitation. Conclusion: Findings from this study can assist nurses and other health care workers to gain a perspective of the recovery and rehabilitation trajectory of patients with a CABG. The results of the study provide a basis for determining areas of functional limitations during recovery from CABG surgery. Study results can also be the foundation for evaluating outcomes of patients with a CABG when specific interventions (eg, pain management, psychosocial support, physical strengthening, fatigue management) are implemented during hospitalization, home recovery, and rehabilitation to target optimal psychosocial and physiologic functioning of patients with a CABG. (Heart Lung® 2000;29:33-46.)
