OBJECTIVE: To describe levels of self-efficacy expectation and performance of selected cardiac recovery behaviors and mood state in patients recovering from percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) and to describe the nature of the relationships among these variables.

: Descriptive, correlational.

G: Hospital (postprocedure, predischarge) and home (2 weeks postdischarge).

ES: Jenkins Self-Efficacy Expectation Scales and Activity Checklists for Walking Various Distances, Following a Dietary Restriction, Maintaining Health, Resuming Roles and Working; and the Profile of Mood States (POMS) Inventory (McNair, Lorr, and Doppleman).

TS: Adult patients (N = 90; 79% men; mean age = 61 years; 50% working preprocedure) who had undergone a PTCA (first procedure 71.1% and elective procedure 77.8%). Mean hospital stay was 3.9 days.

S: Mean self-efficacy expectation scores were moderately high postprocedure for all behaviors and all, except scores for role resumption, increased significantly (p &lt; 0.01) by 2 weeks postdischarge. Self-efficacy expectation scores were significantly and positively related to behavior performance for all study behaviors except work at 2 weeks, with r values ranging from 0.26 to 0.85. Mean total mood state (POMS) scores improved significantly (p &lt; 0.01) over the 2-week period. Those with higher efficacy expectation scores tended to have higher behavior performance scores and lower levels of mood disturbance. It was noted that the level of mood disturbance was low at both data collection points.

SIONS: These findings demonstrate the predictive ability of self-efficacy expectation related to behavior performance and describe the relationships of these variables with total mood state as measured by the POMS. Clinical implications drawn from these findings support the individualization of patient teaching needed for this population and point to the need for further research, including development of more clinically useful instruments for assessing these variables.
