Objective: The goal of this study was to identify common sources of distress in spouses of patients undergoing cardiac rehabilitation and to compare spouses classified as being in distress and those classified as nondistressed on demographic variables, their experiences of stress, coping strategies employed, marital intimacy, and level of family functioning. The study aimed to describe the needs of spouses with respect to possible interventions. Design: A cross-sectional analysis was used. Setting: The study was located at the University of Ottawa Heart Institute Prevention and Rehabilitation Centre’s cardiac rehabilitation program. Outcome Measures: Scores on the Brief Symptom Inventory, Heart Disease Hassles Scale, Coping Strategies Inventory, Miller Intimacy Scale, and McMaster Family Assessment Device were used as outcome measures. Results: Two hundred thirteen female spouses of patients undergoing cardiac rehabilitation participated in this study. Sixty-six percent of the spouses met the criteria for distress. This was more common in younger spouses (51.99 ± 9.94 years) than in older spouses (55.74 ± 10.54 years) (t = –2.45; P =.013). Distressed spouses used disengagement coping strategies significantly more than the nondistressed spouses (t = 6.91; P =.0001). Distressed spouses also reported significantly less intimacy in their marriages (t = –3.99; P =.0001) and poorer family functioning (t = 5.86; P =.0001). The most prevalent symptoms of psychologic distress included feeling tense, having trouble falling asleep and feeling easily hurt. The most prevalent stressors were as follows: (1) worries about treatment, recovery, and prognosis (75.5%); (2) moodiness of the patient (66.7%); (3) worries about the patient returning to work and about money (38.8%); (4) sexual concerns (36.7%); and (5) helplessness or apathy on the part of the patient and increased spousal responsibility (36.1%). Conclusions: Spouses of patients undergoing cardiac rehabilitation should be screened for psychologic distress, and those in distress should be offered interventions focused on assisting them to deal with specific stressors related to their experience with a spouse with heart disease. Interventions indicated include stress-management techniques and encouraging the use of engagement coping strategies. In addition, marital and family concerns need to be directly addressed in support interventions. (Heart Lung® 2000;29:97-104.)
