Objective
udy’s objective was to (1) describe uncertainty, anxiety, the symptom distress experience, and functional status of patients on a coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) waiting list and express the relationship between these concepts; (2) explore whether length of time waited has an influence on the psychosomatic condition of patients; and (3) explore the use of semistructured interviews within the context of a theoretic framework and compare open-ended responses to quantitative results.

riptive, correlational, cross-sectional design was used with supplementary telephone interviews using semistructured questions. Quantitative data were collected with a mailed questionnaire. Study instruments included the Mishel Uncertainty in Illness Scale (Community), Symptom Frequency and Symptom Distress Scale, Graphical Anxiety Rating Scale, and Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (Physical and Social Limitation). The Mishel Uncertainty in Illness Theory was used as the guiding theoretic framework.
g
udy took place in one large tertiary care hospital in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

udy included a convenience sample of 42 patients undergoing first-time elective CABG only, 25 of whom participated in the telephone interview.
s
e uncertainty and anxiety were present at moderate levels and were associated with moderate deterioration of functional status. Reported symptom distress was low; however, presence of symptoms showed a strong relationship with anxiety (P = .0002), and this relationship was confirmed through semistructured interviews. Although the relationship between uncertainty and anxiety was nonsignificant, the interviews suggest positive views of uncertainty as an opportunity may have muted the relationship between uncertainty and anxiety, and that it is possible to experience uncertainty as a danger and an opportunity simultaneously. No statistically significant relationship was found between the study variables and waiting time; however, there was a nonsignificant trend toward deterioration of psychologic and physical condition with longer waits, which may be clinically significant.
sion
social distress and physical condition among patients on CABG waiting lists should be continually assessed in all patients regardless of how long they have been waiting. Each patient will have a unique presentation of symptoms and a corresponding unique psychologic response.
