Objective: To investigate the impact of automated external defibrillator (AED) placement in the homes of postmyocardial infarction (MI) patients and their significant others. Design: This qualitative study used a semistructured interview to examine a nonrandomized convenience sample recruited from a larger study of home AEDs. Setting and Participants: Patients (and their significant others) were recruited from an ongoing study of AED use in the home. Seventeen interviews with 15 patients (14 men, 1 woman) and 16 significant others (1 man, 15 women) aged 39 to 80 years were performed in patients' homes. Methods: Verbatim transcripts of audiotaped interviews were reviewed, and responses were categorized. Other data were obtained from hospital chart abstraction. Results: The majority of subjects noted only positive effects of the presence of home AEDs (eg, giving them feelings of security and control). There was no evidence that AED presence in the home caused excessive anxiety or stress either in patients or their significant others, nor were they perceived to cause relationship stress. On average, patients and their significant others estimated a 38% and 43% (respectively) risk of cardiac arrest and a 92% and 87% likelihood of a successful resuscitation with the use of the AED. Subjects' perceived risk of cardiac arrest were subjectively related to their estimate of current health status, size of infarction, and symptoms during their MI. Subjects also related their estimates of risk to their likelihood of traveling with their AED and whether they would consider purchasing one. Significant others had high confidence in their ability to properly use the AED. Conclusions: AEDs were valued highly by subjects and enhanced their perceived control over their heart disease. This was especially true for subjects who believed that their risk of cardiac arrest was high. The possible effects of providing education regarding expert estimates of the likelihood of cardiac arrest and of a successful resuscitation at the time of AED placement are discussed. (Heart Lung® 2002;31:173-85.)
