Objective: The primary purpose of this study was to assess the relationship between preoperative risk factors, postoperative chronic pain, sleep, and gender on perceptions of quality of life (QoL) in a sample of 123 coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery patients 12 months after surgery. A secondary purpose was to determine whether there is concordance between spousal and patient reporting of QoL after CABG surgery. Design: A cross-sectional comparative study. Setting: The study setting included patients living in the community, who had had CABG surgery 12 months earlier at The Alfred hospital, a major metropolitan public acute care center, in Melbourne, Australia. Participants: Study participants were 123 adult patients (mean age = 64 years) who had undergone CABG surgery and had participated in a recent clinical trial. These patients were followed up to 12 months. The patient’s spouse or next of kin (NoK) was asked questions about their perception of change in the patient’s QoL. Instruments: Results were assessed using The Medical Outcome Study Short Form–36 (SF-36) questionnaire and additional questions given at 12 months after CABG surgery. The Cleveland Clinic Clinical Severity Score (CSS) was used preoperatively as a tool to predict QoL outcome. Results: Significant improvements in QoL, as measured by the SF-36, were seen in physical functioning (P &lt;.0001), bodily pain (P =.024), social functioning (P =.011), and role limitations resulting from emotional status (P =.003). Other significant associations (P =.002) were found between poor QoL and patients who reported severe pain or poor quality sleep. Low-risk patients, as identified by the preoperative CSS, were more likely to have improved QoL at 12 months. Alteration in QoL was reported equally by patients and their spouses or NoK. Short-term memory impairment was reported by 41% of spouses or NoK. Conclusions: CABG surgery results in improved QoL for the majority of patients with extensive coronary artery disease. Nevertheless, some patients continue to have severe pain, sleep disturbances, and altered relationship with their spouse or NoK 12 months after surgery. (Heart Lung® 2000;29:401-11.)
