Objective: The purpose of this pilot study was to describe the lifestyle and health status of long-term cardiac transplant recipients. Design And Setting: The study was a descriptive correlational design at a health sciences center. Measures: We measured lifestyle, using the Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile-II, and indicators of health status (eg, number of medications, infections, and rejections; systolic and diastolic blood pressure; lipid profile; and percent ideal body weight) in 47 patients after an annual evaluation or follow-up visit after patients received cardiac transplantation. Results: Patients were primarily male, white, 56.5 years old and 75.6 months after transplant. Spiritual growth was the most frequently reported lifestyle characteristic (mean, 27.4; SD, 4.9). The least frequently reported lifestyle characteristic was engagement in physical activity (mean, 18.4; SD, 5.7). Factorial between-subjects analysis of variance demonstrated that women had a higher high-density lipoprotein level (P =.0001) and reported healthier dietary habits (P =.02) and greater spiritual growth (P =.006) than men. African Americans reported poorer stress management behaviors (P =.04). Recipients whose heart failure was due to ischemic cardiomyopathy had a lower percent ideal body weight than those with a nonischemic cause (P =.01). Recipients with cardiac allograft vasculopathy had a higher low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level (P =.05) and lower high-density lipoprotein cholesterol level (P =.05) than those without cardiac allograft vasculopathy, and those persons who required maintenance corticosteroid therapy reported poorer interpersonal relationships than those persons not receiving corticosteroids (P =.04). Conclusion: Cardiac transplant recipients did not consistently include health-promoting behaviors in their lifestyles although some of the behaviors were associated with a better health status. Future research should be aimed at identifying factors that affect the ability to make and sustain changes in lifestyle and improve health status. (Heart Lung® 2001;30:445-57.)
