One of the most significant factors for improving the quality and success of urban spaces is increasing the publicity of their routine activities. Direct observations of some great experts such as William White and Jan Gehl demonstrate that the successful public places have three essential advantages: density, variety and wide range of different social interactions. Despite former studies by academic experts, the activities themselves have never been considered in particular as effective factors on the space design. Studying urban spaces from this point of view will also help us organize the activities. “Sitting” is one of the most attractive and most important activities in urban spaces. Conscious decisions being made on where to sit (ledges, benches, steps, etc.) are evidences for an appropriate space, view or peripheral circumstances. Hence making assessments on these decisions will clarify the extent at which these spaces may seem appropriate to citizens. Considering the diversity of social and cultural activities in Theatre Shahr Square, it could be labeled as an important urban space in Tehran. Theater and traditional performances attracts a variety of social crowds specially youngers and artists to this public place. Sitting on ledges and benches is one of the most popular activities of attending people therein. Reasons for this particular activity vary from waiting for weekly programs to start, waiting for friends, having a chat, watching people and the surrounding area and so on. Holding the objective of investigating the relation between the physical environment of this urban space and the important activities conducted therein and also the rate at which this environment satisfies the behavioral patterns of attendees, this paper will analyze and assess the activity of sitting in the public square of Theatre Shahr. The assessment is based on direct observation of the public area in front of the Theatre Shahr building and the surrounding public zones by camera shooting in accordance with Whyte Pattern and also the statistical analysis of the activity-level, the count and the age group of people and the time period they are engaged with the activity using GIS and MS Excel software programs. The results show that in this urban space the ledges are more favorable to people, especially to those attending there in groups, in comparison to benches. In the time of any acrobatic or theatrical shows, the use of sitting places increases by 2 to 10 times; being concave, dependence to the shape of the square, being shaded and serving the possibility of sitting in different height levels are among the specifications of an appropriate place for sitting. Most of the activities happen in the areas where sitting places have better physical characteristics; design of the edges includes considering the attributes of its physical environment and also providing a suitable view for any activity show in front; and finally the physical environment of the square does not provide the requirements for the attendance of women and children. 
