Background: There has been recent concern about long-term morbidity associated with arthroscopic co-planing of the acromioclavicular joint in the treatment of impingement syndrome. Objective: The purpose of this study was to assess the results of the co-planing procedure, special attention being paid to acromioclavicular joint morbidity. Methods: The study included 56 patients who were operated on by the senior author. Outcomes were evaluated both objectively and subjectively through physical examinations and telephone surveying. Each patient had subacromial decompression at the time of the index surgery. Other concomitant arthroscopic procedures included rotator cuff repair and labral debridement or repair. Results: Average follow-up was 4 years (range, 2-7 years). Thirty-five (95%) of 37 patients had no subjective pain and no objective tenderness to direct palpation or compression of the acromioclavicular joint. The joint was not clinically hypermobile in comparison with that on the opposite side in any patient. In all, 95% of patients had good or excellent results in terms of the University of California at Los Angeles Shoulder Score. Of the 2 patients who did have pain and tenderness at the acromioclavicular joint, both had had multiple operations on their shoulders before the index procedure. Nineteen patients were not examined clinically but did complete a telephone survey; these 19 patients were not symptomatic at the acromioclavicular joint. Conclusions: To fully treat impingement syndrome, the surgeon should remove osteophytes under the lateral clavicle and medial acromion. With good technique, the surgeon can leave the anterior, posterior, and superior acromioclavicular joint capsule intact. We conclude that for appropriate clinical indications, beveling the inferior 20% to 25% of the clavicle to make it co-planar with the decompressed acromion is safe and is not an etiologic factor in acromioclavicular joint pain or instability. (J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2000;9:498-501.)
