Dislocation arthropathy after surgical treatment of recurrent anterior dislocation of the shoulder has been a subject of discussion over the years. The objective of this prospective study was to evaluate the Bristow-Latarjet repair at 2 and 15 years after surgery with respect to arthropathy and to evaluate factors responsible for this development. At 2 and 15 years after a Bristow-Latarjet repair for recurrent anterior dislocation, we prospectively analyzed the radiographs of 115 of 118 shoulders. The majority of the patients also had radiography of the nonindex shoulder (111/118). Dislocation arthropathy was found on ordinary anteroposterior views in 46 of 115 shoulders (mild in 39, moderate in 5, and severe in 2). The anteroposterior view angulated 45° from above gave the best visualization of the humeral osteophyte and, together with the axial view, doubled the incidence of moderate and severe arthropathy at follow-up (mild in 40, moderate in 11, and severe in 5). Of 38 shoulders with a postoperative position of the transferred coracoid process 2 to 4 mm medial to the glenoid rim and the screw and transplant parallel to the glenoid, 3 had moderate arthropathy (8%) compared with 8 shoulders with moderate arthropathy and 5 with severe arthropathy out of 77 shoulders with a nonoptimal position of the coracoid (17%) (P = not significant). The degree of restriction of outward rotation at 2 years did not influence the degree of arthropathy after 15 years. Global assessment of the operative result was not related to arthropathy at follow-up. When the first dislocation occurred before age 23 years, the incidence of arthropathy was significantly lower than when it occurred in age 23 years or older (P = .006). When all views were included, moderate or severe dislocation arthropathy was found in 14% of the shoulders, and a further 35% had mild arthropathy. When follow-up studies of operated series of shoulder dislocations with the Bristow-Latarjet method are done, it is important to have the same radiologic views to compare the incidence of dislocation arthropathy correctly.
