Hypothesis
pothesis was that tightening of the posterior capsule would lead to increased subacromial pressure and increased superior translation during active abduction in the scapular plane.
ound
omial impingement syndrome is a painful condition that occurs during overhead activities as the rotator cuff is compressed in the subacromial space. Unrecognized secondary causes of subacromial impingement may lead to treatment failure. Posterior capsular tightness, believed to alter glenohumeral joint kinematics, is often cited as a secondary cause of SI; however, scientific evidence is lacking. The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of posterior capsular tightening on peak subacromial pressure during abduction in the scapular plane.
als and methods
esh frozen shoulder specimens from deceased donors were mounted on a custom shoulder simulator. With the scapula fixed, the deltoid and rotator cuff muscles were loaded in discrete static steps with a constant ratio to elevate the humerus in the scapular plane. The treatment order (no tightening, 1-cm, and 2-cm tightening of the posterior capsule) was randomly assigned to each specimen. Peak subacromial contact pressure and glenohumeral kinematics at the peak pressure position were compared using a repeated measures analysis of variance.
s
ubacromial pressures (mean ± standard deviation) were similar between treatment groups: 345 ± 152, 410 ± 213, and 330 ± 164 kPa for no tightening, 1-cm, and 2-cm tightening of the posterior capsule respectively (P &gt; .05). No significant differences were found for superior or anterior translations at the peak pressure position (P &gt; .05).
sion
ior capsular tightening, as a sole variable, did not contribute to a significant increase in peak subacromial pressure during abduction in the scapular plane. A similar study simulating active forward flexion is necessary to fully characterize the contribution of posterior capsular tightness to subacromial impingement.
sion
ning of the posterior capsule did not increase subacromial pressure, or increase superior or anterior translation during abduction in the scapular plane.
