Objective: As a biological tissue material, amniotic membrane (AM) has low immunogenicity
and to date has been widely adopted in clinical practice. However, some features
such as low biomechanical consistency and rapid biodegradation is limited the application
of AM. Therefore, in this study, we fabricated a novel three-dimensional (3D) spongy scaffold
made of the extracellular matrix (ECM) of denuded AM. Due to their unique characteristics
which are similar to the skin, these scaffolds can be considered as an alternative
option in skin tissue engineering.
Materials and Methods: In this experimental study, cellular components of human amniotic
membrane (HAM) were removed with 0.03% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS). Quantitative
analysis was performed to determine levels of Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), collagen, and
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). To increase the low efficiency and purity of the ECM component,
especially collagen and GAG, we applied an acid solubilization procedure hydrochloridric acid
(HCl 0.1 M) with pepsin (1 mg/ml). In the present experiment 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethyl aminopropyl)
carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC)/N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) cross linker agent was
used to improve the mechanical properties of 3D lyophilized AM scaffold. The spongy 3D AM
scaffolds were specified, by scanning electron microscopy, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining,
a swelling test, and mechanical strength and in vitro biodegradation tests. Human fetal
fibroblast culture systems were used to establish that the scafolds were cytocompatible.
Results: Histological analysis of treated human AM showed impressive removal of cellular
components. DNA content was diminished after treatment (39 ± 4.06 ?g/ml vs. 341 ±
29.60 ?g/ml). Differences were observed between cellular and denude AM in matrix collagen
(478 ± 18.06 ?g/mg vs. 361 ± 27.47 ?g/mg).With the optimum concentration of 1 mM
NHS/EDC ratio1:4, chemical cross-linker agent could significantly increase the mechanical
property, and resistance to collagenase digestion. The results of 2, 4, 6-Trinitrobenzenesulfonic
acid (TNBS) test showed that cross-linking efficiency of AM derived ECM scaffolds
was about 65% ± 10.53. Scaffolds treated with NHS/EDC cross-linker agent by 100
?g/ml collagenase, lost 75% of their dry weight after 14 days. The average pore size of
3D spongy scaffold was 160 ?m measured from scanning electron microscope (SEM) images
that it is suitable for cell penetration, nutrients and gas change. In addition, the NHS/
EDC cross-linked AM scaffolds were able to support human fetal fibroblast cell proliferation
in vitro. Extracts and contact prepared from the 3D spongy scaffold of AM showed a
significant increase in the attachment and proliferation of the human fetal fibroblasts cells.
Conclusion: The extra-cellular matrix of denuded AM-based scaffold displays the main
properties required for substitute skin including natural in vitro biodegradation, similar
physical and mechanical characterization, nontoxic biomaterial and no toxic effect on cell
attachment and cell proliferation.
