Objective: The effect of interleukin (IL)-29, a new therapeutic agent similar to type I interferons
(IFNs), on IFN-? secretion of human plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) has
not been studied. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to clarify the effect of IL-29 on IFN-?
secretion of pDCs using human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in the presence
of cytosine-phosphate-guanosinemotif-containing oligodeoxy nucleotides (CpG).
Materials and Methods: In this experimental and prospective study, PBMCs were obtained
from 11 healthy volunteers and divided into four culture conditions: I. control, II.
CpG treatment, III. IL-29 treatment and IV. CpG plus IL-29 treatment. The amount of IFN-?
secretion was measured from each culture supernatant by flow cytometry using the flowcytomix
apparatus (eBioscience, Vienna, Austria). Fractional IFN-? production of the cultured
PBMCs was measured by intracellular staining using the cytomics FC 500 system
(Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA) with CXP Software.
Results: The mean ± standard deviation (SD) of supernatant IFN-? secretion per pDC/?L was
5.7 ± 9.3 pg/mL/count/?L for condition I, 1071.5 ± 1026.6 pg/mL/count/?L for condition II, 14.1
± 21.1 pg/mL/count/?L for condition III, and 1913.9 ± 1525.9 pg/mL/count/?L for condition IV.
There were statistically significant differences between conditions I and II as well as betweenconditions
II and IV. Intracellular IFN-? production was only detectable in the pDC fraction from
one culture; the production amount was similar between the cells treated with CpG and those
treated with CpG plus IL-29. Natural killer (NK) cell production of IFN-? was observed in two out
of three cultures and one culture showed IFN- ? production in the monocyte fraction.
Conclusion: IL-29 alone did not show any effect on IFN-? secretion of PBMCs. However,
the addition of CpG along with IL-29 enhanced IFN-? secretion of PBMCs. Given that
pDCs are the major secretors of IFN-? in peripheral blood, this result has suggested the
possibility that IL-29 has an enhancing effect in human pDC IFN-? secretion. Although the
supernatant IFN-? secretion was not directly correlated with pDCs’s intracellular IFN-?
production in this study, prolonged incubation of pDC and other PB subsets with CpG
or IL-29 for over 4 hours could be applied in future studies. These studies would help to
elucidate the mechanism of action of IL-29 in human pDCs associated with viral infections.
