Objective(s): Radiation therapy for breast cancer can induce myocardial capillary injury and 
increase cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. A prospective cohort was conducted to study 
the prevalence of myocardial perfusion abnormalities following radiation therapy of left-sided 
breast cancer patients as compared to those with right–sided cancer. 
Methods: To minimize potential confounding factors, only those patients with low 10-year 
risk of coronary artery disease (based on Framingham risk scoring) were included. All 
patients were initially treated by modified radical mastectomy and then were managed by 
postoperative 3D Conformal Radiation Therapy (CRT) to the surgical bed with an additional 
1-cm margin, delivered by 46-50 Gy (in 2 Gy daily fractions) over a 5-week course. The same 
dose-adjusted chemotherapy regimen (including anthracyclines, cyclophosphamide and 
taxol) was given to all patients. Six months after radiation therapy, all patients underwent 
cardiac SPECT for the evaluation of myocardial perfusion. 
Results: A total of 71 patients with a mean age of 45.3±7.2 years [35 patients with leftsided 
breast cancer (exposed) and 36 patients with right-sided cancer (controls)] were enrolled. 
Dose-volume histogram (DVH) [showing the percentage of the heart exposed to  > 50% 
of radiation] was significantly higher in patients with left-sided breast cancer. Visual 
interpretation detected perfusion abnormalities in 42.9% of cases and 16.7% of controls 
(P=0.02, Odds ratio=1.46). In semiquantitative segmental analysis, only apical (28.6% versus 
8.3%, P=0.03) and anterolateral (17.1% versus 2.8%, P=0.049) walls showed significantly 
reduced myocardial perfusion in the exposed group. Summed Stress Score (SSS) of > 3 was 
observed in twelve cases (34.3%), while in five of the controls (13.9%),(Odds ratio=1.3). There 
was no significant difference between the groups regarding left ventricular ejection fraction. 
Conclusion: The risk of radiation induced myocardial perfusion abnormality in patients 
treated with CRT on the left hemi thorax is not low. It is reasonable to minimize the volume of 
the heart being in the field of radiation employing didactic radiation planning techniques. Also 
it is advisable to screen these patients with MPI-SPECT, even if they are clinically asymptomatic, 
as early diagnosis and treatment of silent ischemia may change the outcome.
