Objective(s): We investigated a frequency of lower extremity uptake on
the radioactive iodine (RAI) whole body scan (WBS) after RAI treatment
in patients with differentiated thyroid cancer, in order to retrospectively
examine whether or not the frequency was pathological.
Methods: This retrospective study included 170 patients with thyroid cancer,
undergoing RAI treatment. Overall, 99r (58%) and 71 (42%)patients received
single and multiple RAI treatments, respectively. Post-therapeutic WBS
was acquired after 3 days of RAI administration. For patients with multiple
RAI treatments, the WBS of their last RAI treatment was evaluated. Lower
extremity uptake on post-therapeutic WBS was classified into 3 categories:
bilateral femoral uptake (type A), bilateral femoral and tibia uptake (type
B), and uptake in bilateral upper and lower extremities (type C). Then, the
patients with RAI uptake in the lower extremities on WBS were analyzed with
clinical parameters.
Results: Overall, 99 patients (58%) had the extremity uptake on their posttherapeutic
RAI WBS. As the results indicated, 42 ,53, and 4 patients had type A,
type B, and type C uptakes, respectively. Lower extremity uptake was significantly
associated with younger age, not only in subjects with multiple RAI treatments
but also in all the patients (P < 0.05). Accumulation in patients with multiple RAI
treatments was more frequent than patients with single RAI treatment (P < 0.05).
Lower extremity uptake was not associated with counts of the white blood cell
count, hemoglobin level, platelet count, estimated glomerular filtration rate,
effective half-time of RAI, serum TSH level, and anti-Tg concentration.
Conclusion: About half of the patients had lower extremity uptake on the posttherapeutic
RAI WBS, especially younger patients and those with multiple
courses of RAI treatment. Bilateral lower extremity’s RAI uptake on the posttherapeutic
WBS should be considered as physiological RAI distribution in
bone marrow.
