Objective: Unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortion (URSA) is one of the main complications
of pregnancy which is usually defined as three or more consecutive pregnancy
losses before the 20th week of gestation without a known cause. Vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) is a potent angiogenic factor and shown, along with its receptors
(VEGFR1, 2), to play important roles in several physiologic processes including reproduction.
The aim of the present study was to analyze gene expression of VEGF and VEGF
receptors in endometrium of patients with a history of URSA compared with normal fertile
women. In addition, serum VEGF concentration was assessed and compared between
the two groups at the same time.
Materials and Methods: In this case control study, endometrial and blood samples were
obtained between day 19th and 24th of menstrual cycle (window of implantation) from 10
women with a history of URSA (case group) and 6 fertile women who had at least one
successful pregnancy (control group). Expression of VEGF and VEGFRs was studied by
reverse transcription- polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and then quantified by real
time PCR. Normalization of expression levels was done by comparison with beta-actin
expression level as an internal control. Relative VEGF, VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 expression
quantities were compared between the two groups. Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) was used for serum VEGF assay.
Results: VEGF, VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 gene expression was detected in endometrial samples
of both groups. The mean relative expression of VEGF gene was lower in the case group
compared with control women, however, both VEGF receptors were expressed higher in endometrium
of the case group. In addition, the serum level of VEGF was significantly higher in the
case group compared with the controls.
Conclusion: Alteration in gene expression of VEGF and its receptors in endometrium
and changes of serum VEGF might play important roles in pathogenesis of unexplained
RSA.
