Abstract
The Islamic arts have ideological basis and epistemological predilection. Artist’s look in such world is
introverting and truth-seeking. This trait is similar with music inherent, which is basically an abstract
art, in some elements. Music video phenomenon which has been introduced and widely extended
during the last decades can be an appropriate form in experiencing the imaginations of this term.
Music video is a combination of music, lyrics and visual forms of images. In different types of music
videos, all types of musics (Pop, Rock, Classical and folk musics, etc.) have been used. By studying
on Islamic art traits, the authors have found out that there are many expressing elements which have
potentialities for imaging. This way of imaging somehow depends on coding system which is among
the Islamic art’s specifications. So the authors decided to study the Islamic arts and their equivalents
in music video based on this pictorial coding. In previous years, two music videos have been made in
Iran which has used expressive elements of Islamic theosophical art as their basic expression forms.
These successful exemplars which have dealt with these issues of Islamic art demonstrate that music
video, as one of the most popular and affective forms in film and television imaging can be an appropriate
context for expressing introversion arts concepts, like Islamic arts. This article tries to study
on the capability of Islamic arts in this imaging form. Studying these elements, such as dream-like
basis of Islamic arts, symbolic look to visible world, artists’ use of theosophical thought, function of
music, and the way(s) of influencing the audience by introducing their familiar mental codes, show
that the Islamic arts include special features and capabilities in media imaging. The article tries to
recognize these features and capabilities in new ways of imaging, by studying and discussing on two
Iranian music videos, named In the Moon Embrace, Navaii. Music video is a manifestation of intelligence
which its short time causes elegance and brevity of expression. So in making a music video,
all of the rules can be used without emphasizing on any of them, and then discover new rules. Music
video is an experimental field. This phenomenon makes its world more specifically and wider year by
year, and therefore it may be one of the most flexible forms in the 21st century. The ability of music
video in shaping mental images, and its function in relation with music, makes a basis which expressive
spaces of music might have been objective. Emerged world of music does not follow the logic
of the real world, it comes from the human mind and effects on it. On the other hand, the Islamic arts,
take meanings from metaphysics to create forms of fantasies. It comes from deep inside of the artist
to recognize human and his/her place in the universe. This article tries to study on relations between
music and expressive elements of Islamic theosophical art in a phenomenon which is a common point
in music and image (music video). Therefore the artists can explore new areas to attract a wide range
of audiences
