Conclusion
Emergence and extent of modern and progressive ideas at the same time increasing the Constitutional Movement in Iran, on the west ready for new associations and activities and many legs of the modern European opened. As for spase  Iran Awakening Lodge shortly after the Constitutional Revolution was founded in Tehran And the First World War (August 1914 / Ramadan 1332) 130 activists and leaders took the constitutional membership. But in the midst of what was important, and the main objective of this research project will provide Effects that relations between Iran Awakening Lodge, the first official event of Freemasonry, and has established centers of power in the constitutional era. In the course of the novel structural features that had emerged after the revolution, The highest attention to the centers of political scans:
1-  Persian national assembly
2 - Government
3 - Court
Lodge, who raised the awareness of features of the new era,The Vasthayjad relations and bilateral relations with each of the three major centers mentioned in the Age of Constitutional bodies for political power and cultural influence in Iran, The center attracts people from all attachments were Trying to enforce and deepen and develop your unique ideas in modern Iranian society and was growing. Due to the establishment of the National Assembly and the Constitutional Movement was a major process, Most attention in the Lodge had its own relationship. In addition to accepting some of its members, who number an overview of the main characters in relations between the Lodge and the Assembly considered, Effects of some of the ideas and practices of bills introduced in the Assembly or Msvbhhay Masonic apron to the left Suggests that the main centers of power in the era of relations with the National Assembly has the constitutional maximum. After assembly, the government's most effective tool in the overall level of performance was in Association of powers in the Constitution as the second era of awakening the attention Lodge made many public sector managers and elected a member of brokers. This shows the interest in having a Lodge for a considerable part of the body's state constitutional era. But because modern Freemasonry French approach, based on a political fight with the oppression of wire, trying to reduce the absolute authority of court And it would create a barrier to Fzvnkhvahyhay. It is natural that the minimum established relations with the Qajar court, rather than the symptoms of the conflict between them is more broad. Although few addicted Qajar princes and associates of the court and the other was a member of Mason Lodge stood. 
With the onset of World War I in August 1914/1332 during which France was involved in it, A way to continue the activities of the subordinate lodges of Freemasonry's Awakening was closed And distance a week after the war began, most East (Grandavryan) France tacitly asked the attention of the box to give his important international meetings. Subsequently, Iran Awakening Lodge campaign officially closed, then on the other it did not constitute a formal meeting.

