Purpose: To report the authors' early experience with radio-frequency (RF) ablation of renal cell carcinoma.

als and Methods: Twenty-four percutaneous RF ablation treatments for nine tumors were performed in eight patients with renal cell carcinoma. Indications included coexistent morbidity, previous surgery, or solitary kidney in patients with a life expectancy shorter than 10 years. Smaller (⩽3-cm) peripheral lesions (n = 3) were treated with single electrodes. All but one of the larger (&gt;3 cm) and/or central lesions (n = 6) were treated with cluster or multiple electrodes. Patients returned for a second treatment when follow-up imaging depicted tumor enhancement. Follow-up imaging was performed at 1 and 3 months and then at 6-month intervals, with a mean follow-up of 10.3 months. Seven patients were alive at least 6 months after their initial treatment.

s: All five exophytic tumors were free of enhancement. One of three central tumors was free of enhancement. One tumor had both central and exophytic components and was free of enhancement. Three tumors were 3 cm or smaller and free of enhancement. Of the six tumors larger than 3 cm, four were free of enhancement.

sion: Percutaneous RF ablation is a promising treatment for select patients with renal cell carcinoma. The ultimate role of this modality will continue to evolve and warrants further study.
tary
nimally invasive technologies are currently being applied to the field of nephron-sparing surgery (NSS) for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) in an effort to decrease operative time, pain, morbidity and hospital stay. Methods of tumor ablation have included cryotherapy, radio-frequency ablation (RFA), high intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU), laser and microwave coagulation. These new modalities are currently being administered laparoscopically or percutaneously; ultimately, completely extracorporeal techniques may be feasible.

imary mechanism of tissue destruction with RFA is thermonecrosis. Radio-frequency energy causes high frequency current flow from the needle electrode into the surrounding tissue. This causes ionic agitation, molecular friction, cellular warming with rapid dessication and cell death. The size and configuration of the lesion are related to the amount of energy delivered, ablation time, tissue impedance, electrolyte content of the tissue and surface area of the electrode. It is a major technical challenge to control for each of these variables independently.

jor concern with RFA and related ablative technologies is the ability to image the destructive process precisely as it is being administered, thereby minimizing injury to normal adjacent parenchyma while assuring complete tumor ablation. Since a surgical specimen is not removed for pathologic study, histologic documentation of complete tumor destruction and accurate tumor staging/grading are not available. Meticulous long-term clinical and radiographic follow-up of treated patients is ultimately needed to validate the efficacy of ablative techniques such as RFA for treating renal malignancy.

 C. Novick, M.D.
