The objective was to predict the patency grade of an infarct-related artery by identifying the time course of the changes of the late potential parameters before, during, and shortly after thrombolysis. The study population consisted of 51 patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) who received thrombolytic therapy within 3.2 ± 1.3 hours from the onset of symptoms. Multiple signal-averaged electrocardiograms (SAECGs) were recorded before, during, and shortly after thrombolysis. A total of 489 single-averaged electrocardiographic tracings were evaluated. Late potentials were defined as: QRS duration &gt;114 ms, low amplitude signals (LASs) &gt;38 ms, and root mean square (RMS) &lt;20 μV. Late potentials were found in 37% of patients (21 before and 16 during the first 2 hours of thrombolysis), disappeared in all of patients within 89 ± 75 minutes (range 25 to 350) but reappeared and persisted in 12% of patients, all with an occluded artery (grade 0). The late potential parameters (QRS, LAS, RMS) showed a gradual improvement which occurred earlier (2 vs 4 hours) and was more marked (0.01 vs 0.05) in cases with a patent artery. This improvement expressed by the late potential parameter index (LnQRS + LnLAS − LnRMS) predicts the patent artery with a sensitivity of 0.94 and specificity of 0.79. The improvement of late potential parameters jointly with close to normal initial values or the late potential parameter index and its changes constituted a satisfactory prediction of the patency grade. Thus, the signal-averaged electrocardiographic technique is capable of predicting the early success or failure of thrombolytic therapy.

te myocardial infarction during thrombolysis, the late potential parameters showed a gradual improvement (regardless of patency grade) that occurred earlier (2 vs 4 hours) and was more pronounced (0.01 vs 0.05) than in cases with patent arteries. In addition, a late potential parameter index predicts the patent artery with a sensitivity of 0.94 and a specificity of 0.79.
