Urban tourism, which has become today one of the world’s most important industries, have been addressed not only because of its economic aspects but also due to its aspects of introducing the history and culture of different cities. Due to its great potential and various kinds, urban tourism could be an appropriate choice for a variety of development and for enhancing the desirability of urban life with designed and humanized cities. Today, choosing the right approach for the industry is an important challenge in the field of urban tourism which will be discussed. 
This study is trying to investigate the characteristics of urban landscape as a landscape approach to the city and to identify successful tourism which is the result of the role of landscape approach to the urban landscape. According to landscape essence, we can say landscape approach to the city is included in every various aspects of it such as spatial- temporal, civilizational- historical and objective- subjective and makes sense of urban phenomena in a general way and in relation to its history and natural environment. In this approach, the city is regarded as a living creature that does not require physical intervention.
In fact, the urban landscape as a kind of landscape that deals with the issue of town and city life is looking to catch the measures to enhance the quality and utility of towns and people’s perception of them. This approach has also given continuity and preservation of the culture and history of the city and keeps it connecting to the history and gives it true identity. On the other hand, tourism has become one of the most important economic activities in developed countries meanwhile there has been a fundamental change in the concept and is pursuing different goals. Today, urban tourism has become one of the objectives and expectations of tourists and has become a factor for understanding the history, culture and collective memory and cognitive elements of the city.
So today, the urban tourism industry not only to fill the leisure times, but also as an arena for cultural identity and urban areas is discussed. For this reason, from now partial strategies can`t be responsive to the urban tourism requirements, But  landscape approach due to its characteristics and features, has the capacity to become a factor for the success of the tourism industry in the city according to cultural, historic and landscape aspects of cities. Due to the urban landscape sense, appropriate perception of the city has been accrued by people and urban tourism would be fulfilled. This approach with addressing the community not only does not disrupt the function of the citizens, but also creates social interactions, stimulates the economy, causes technological exchanges, and enhances the welfare of the city so the city is co-owned by citizens and tourists.
