Background: Tuberculosis (TB) continues to be a major public health problem worldwide. In developing countries, the burden of the
disease is explosive, as 95% of global TB patients reside and 98% of global TB deaths occur in these regions. Patients’ satisfaction may play a
major role in adherence to medications and hence improve tuberculosis cure rate. Objectives: The current study aimed firstly to determine the level of patients’ satisfaction with TB services in Gezira state, and secondly to
identify it’s major contributing factors. Patients and Methods: This was a cross-sectional study by design, which included newly diagnosed TB patients in the Gezira state, located
in central Sudan. The data was collected by simple random sampling from 292 patients using a pre tested questionnaire after obtaining
an informed consent. Results: The level of satisfaction with the provided TB services was 56.2%. Patients with no income were more satisfied (82.7%) with TB
services than those with debts (67.1%) and savings (42.7%). Patients who attended private facilities were more satisfied with TB services
(85.3%) than those who attended public health facilities. Patients were more satisfied with TB services provided by the medical assistants
(70%) than that provided by general practitioners (54.4%), interns (44.7%) and chest physicians (38.3%). Tuberculosis patients who spent
shorter time to receive their required service were more satisfied (63.3%) than those who spent a longer duration of time (45.4%). Conclusions: The level of satisfaction of TB patients with the provided services was moderate. Patients having high income were more
satisfied with the provided TB services than those with low income. Patients who attended private hospitals and general/chest hospitals
showed high satisfaction with the provided TB services than those who attended health centers and the Tuberculosis Basic Management
Units (TBMUs). Tuberculosis patients treated by a junior staff showed more satisfaction than patients treated by a senior physician.
