Objective
luate the 5-year results of the following trimodal therapy for treatment of some selected cases of muscle invasive bladder cancer.
als and Methods
s prospective study, we included 104 patients with transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) (T2 and T3a, N0, M0) who were amenable to complete transurethral resection. All patients received adjuvant chemo-radiotherapy (CRT) in the form of gemcitabine and cisplatin and conventional radiotherapy after the maximum resection of their tumors. Two weeks later, all cases had radiologic and cystoscopic evaluation. The patients who showed no evidence of the bladder tumors [complete response (CR)] went on to complete the CRT, while those with recurrent invasive tumors did not receive any more CRT and were assigned to have salvage cystectomy. Thereafter, all patients were subjected to a regular follow-up.
s
rimodal therapy was well tolerated in most of cases with no severe acute toxicities. Complete response was achieved in 78.8% of cases after the initial CRT, and tumor grade was found to be the most significant risk factor to predict this response (P = 0.004). With a median follow-up of 71 months for patients with initial CR, 16.2% of cases showed muscle invasive recurrences, and multifocality was the only significant risk factor for their development (P = 0.003). Meanwhile, superficial recurrences were detected in 8.1% of cases with initial CR and were successfully treated with transurethral resection and intravesical bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG). On the other hand, we reported distant metastasis in 24.3% of patients with initial CR, and tumor grade, stage and multifocality were the most significant risk factors for this complication (P = 0.002, 0.031, 0.006). No cases of contracted bladder or late gastrointestinal complications were demonstrated in this series. The 5-year overall survival rate for patients with initial CR was 67.6%, and for all the patients in this study it was 59.4%.
sions
rimodal therapy can be considered as a treatment option for patients with localized muscle invasive TCC. The best candidates for such therapy are those with solitary T2, low grade tumors that are amenable to complete transurethral resection.
