Objective
estigate whether carcinoma in situ (CIS) lesion could be considered a surrogate marker of urothelium genetic instability and field carcinogenesis or not, we evaluated DNA content, p53 overexpression, and proliferative index (Ki-67 expression) in primary tumor, in tumor-adjacent mucosa, and distant urothelial mucosa with and without presence of CIS.
ts and methods
ospective study in radical cystectomy specimens from 49 patients was carried out. All the lesions present in each cystectomy specimen were studied, including the tumor area and the adjacent mucosa (AM). Whenever possible, the distant mucosa (DM) was also studied. When CIS was detected, this lesion and the surrounding normal mucosa were also studied. The 49 tumor areas included high grade papillary urothelial carcinoma (HGP) in 19 cases (38.8%) and invasive urothelial cell carcinomas in 30 cases (61.2%). The nuclear DNA content of cancer cells was evaluated using image cytometry allowing the determination of the DNA ploidy and 5cER parameters. The p53 and Ki-67 immunoexpression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry.
s
sions were observed in the AM and DM of both tumor groups: 15.8% and 15.4% in AM and DM, for each one of them, in HGP group and 26.7% and 22.2% in AM and DM, for each one of them, in invasive tumors group. In CIS lesion aneuploid DNA content, p53 overexpression and high proliferative labeling index were observed. The so-called normal mucosa (AM and DM) with and without focus of CIS lesions were compared for genetic instability and molecular alterations profile. Statistical differences were observed between the normal mucosa with and without CIS: the so-called normal mucosa areas with focus of CIS revealed significantly higher frequencies of DNA content alterations, p53 overexpression, and higher proliferative index. These differences were significantly different in the invasive UCC group, but this profile it is also present in HPG group.
sion
tudy points out that CIS is a marker of genetic instability of the urothelium mucosa. The CIS surrounding morphologically normal urothelium showed a high frequency of abnormal DNA content, with high percentage of clear aneuploid cells (high 5cER), p53 mutated protein expression, and a proliferative status underlying a field carcinogenesis. These alterations in normal mucosa were not found when CIS was not present.
