Objective
ermine the health-related quality of life (HRQoL) impact of prostate cancer interventions at 2 years post-treatment, and between the 12- and 24-month interval, to better characterize this measure.
als and methods
ts treated at the Center for Prostate Disease Research between June 2003 and February 2010 were offered enrollment into a HRQoL study that entailed a baseline evaluation before prostate biopsy and at 3, 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, and 30 months thereafter. The instruments used were the Expanded Prostate Cancer Index Composite (EPIC), EPIC Demographic, and Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form 36 (SF-36). A Student's t-test and ANOVA were used to examine the association between HRQoL scores, patient demographic, and disease features. Multivariable regression models were used to analyze change over time. Estimates of risk, corresponding confidence intervals, and P values are presented for these longitudinal findings.
s
udy group was comprised of 595 patients. African Americans (AA) had slightly lower baseline raw scores in all EPIC and SF-36 HRQoL domains, but on bivariate analysis, there was no statistical difference in change of scores over time. Radical prostatectomy (RP) led to the greatest decline in urinary function. Bowel function significantly worsened with the addition of hormone therapy (HT) to external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Sexual bother and function had a marked decline in all active treatment options. Despite these changes, there were no differences in overall satisfaction. SF-36 domains were not affected by RP, whereas EBRT and EBRT + HT had universal impact. For the 12- to 24-month interval, specifically, patients who underwent EBRT fared worse over this time period, showing continued worsening of urinary bother, hormonal function, physical role, physical component summary, and overall satisfaction. Patients who underwent RP did not show any further decline in the 12- to 24-month interval, but instead showed improvement.
sions
e of the protracted nature of recovery after surgery, delayed onset of effects from radiation, potential interval decline secondary to age-related symptoms, and longevity of patients with prostate cancer, determination of long-term HRQoL outcomes is integral. Counseling with regard to these outcomes should be balanced with oncologic expectations from treatment.
