Objective
gical, window of opportunity trials have been proposed as a model to assess the activity of preventive and therapeutic interventions in a cost-effective manner in prostate cancer (CaP). The aim of the study was to explore karyometry as a method for monitoring the efficacy of intervention with preventive agents in patients with CaP.
als and methods
terial used in this investigation was from the 2F study, i.e., an Italian prospective randomized phase IIb presurgical study of finasteride vs. low-dose flutamide vs. placebo in men with CaP. Image analysis was performed in 16 cases treated with finasteride, 24 with flutamide, and 20 with placebo. For all these cases, CaP and normal looking secretory epithelium were present in the pretreatment biopsies as well as the post-treatment ex-vivo biopsies obtained from the radical prostatectomy specimens.
s
ablish a direction of nuclear change from normal to malignancy, i.e., the so-called line of progression, a discriminant function was derived with the normal looking epithelium in the pretreatment biopsies as one endpoint, and the CaP in the pretreatment biopsies as the other. The discriminant function was then applied to the post-treatment groups. The increase in relative nuclear area was the dominant feature. In the placebo group, 15 out of 20 CaP (75%) cases had a higher discriminant function score at the end of study, with a significant increase of the mean score by 90%. The flutamide treated CaP cases had increased discriminant function scores in 19 out of 24 cases (79%) and an increase of the mean score by 43%; the 5 cases with lower scores involved only minor reductions. In contrast, the finasteride treated CaP cases had increased discriminant function scores for 8 out of 16 cases (50%), but the increase in the mean score was by only 8%.
sion
xploratory study establishes that karyometric monitoring can track the results of subtle nuclear changes induced by preventive interventions in men with CaP, thus allowing assessment of agent activity in a cost-effective manner.
