Objective
luate the efficacy and safety of targeted agents (sorafenib and sunitinib) as postoperative adjuvant therapy in Chinese patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CC-RCC) who are at high risk for disease recurrence.
als and methods
three patients treated at our center between December 2007 and December 2010 with locally advanced CC-RCC who were at a high risk for disease recurrence were enrolled into the study. The criteria for high risk of CC-RCC recurrence postoperatively were defined according to the Mayo Clinic stage, size, grade, and necrosis (SSIGN) score for CC-RCC. After radical nephrectomy, patients received either sorafenib (group A, n = 20) or sunitinib (group B, n = 23) and were followed up for at least 1 year to determine the efficacy and safety of the test products. The duration of maintenance targeted medication treatment was approximately 1 year. Group C consisted of 388 CC-RCC patients treated at our center between 1992 and 2007, who were at high risk for disease recurrence and who received no adjuvant therapy.
s
mography characteristics were similar among the 3 groups. The overall rate of recurrence in groups A and B was not different (15.0% and 17.4% (P &gt; 0.05), respectively), which was lower than that of group C (38.7%, P &lt; 0.05 compared with groups A and B). Disease-free survival (DFS) was longer in groups A and B (18.9 ± 5.9 months and 16.9 ± 6.1 months [P &gt; 0.05], respectively), compared with group C (13.3 ± 7.2 months, P &lt; 0.05 compared with groups A and B). The common adverse effects of targeted therapy included hand-foot syndrome, fatigue, diarrhea, taste disturbance, rash, hypertension, alopecia, stomatitis, neutropenia, nausea, pruritus, hypothyroidism in groups A and B. The adverse effects were mild in both groups and the incidence was not significantly different between groups A and B.
sions
ed adjuvant therapy postoperatively with sorafenib or sunitinib in patients with CC-RCC who are at a high risk for disease recurrence was well tolerated and effective in reducing the rate of CC-RCC recurrence in these patients. This study is an attempt to assess the utility of adjuvant tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) after surgery for renal carcinoma. The apparently improved outcomes, compared with a historical control population, are of sufficient interest to support the continuation of an ongoing randomized clinical trial to validate the hypothesis.
