Few data exist on the quality of life in children and adolescents with implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs). The objective of this study was to determine whether anxiety, depression, family functioning, and quality of life are related to cardiac illness severity in pediatric patients with ICDs. The subjects were 20 patients (mean age 14.8 years; median 15.1, range 9 to 19) who had an ICD implantation a mean 1.4 years (median 0.1, range 0 to 6) before the study. The patients completed the Revised Children's Manifest Anxiety Scale, Reynold's Adolescent/Child Depression Scales, Child Health Questionnaire-87, and the Worries About ICDs Scale. The parents completed the Impact-on-Family Scale and the Child Health Questionnaire (CHQ-50). The Defibrillator Severity Index assessed cardiac severity. The rates of anxiety or depression were not increased, although the patients appeared to experience a greater need for social acceptance. Parent ratings of overall family functioning did not differ significantly from normative sample means. Parents reported significantly lower CHQ-50 summary physical functioning scores than scores of a normative United States sample, whereas there was no significant difference for the CHQ-50 summary psychosocial score. Caregivers perceived that their children had a lower quality of life when asked about their child's physical functioning, functioning in the social-physical role, and general health perceptions. Despite the overall nonsignificance of the psychosocial summary score, the social emotional/behavioral role, and the emotional impact their child's health had on themselves, subscales were all significantly lower than the normative sample. Cardiac illness severity was not significantly associated with anxiety, depression, quality of life, or family functioning. However, significant associations were found among measures of anxiety, depression, family functioning, and quality of life. Overall, most pediatric patients with ICDs appear to be a resilient group of youngsters. Their quality of life was more strongly correlated with their feelings of anxiety and depression as well as their family functioning than to the severity of their cardiac illness.
