Nowadays the automotive scientific community and companies are focusing part of their efforts on the investigation of new combustion modes in Compression Ignition (CI) engines, mainly based on the use of locally lean air–fuel mixtures. This characteristic, combined with exhaust gas recirculation, provides low combustion temperatures that reduce pollutant formation. However these combustion concepts have some shortcomings, related to combustion phasing control and combustion stability under the light load engine operating range which must be overcome. The aim of this work is focused on the study of the integration of phasing and cycle-to-cycle repeatability control by means of an ignition spark plug system in a CI engine working under partially premixed charge (PPC) in order to overcome the lack of combustion stability in light load conditions when very low fuel reactivity is used. To achieve this objective, experimental tests have been carried out in a single cylinder optical engine combining broadband luminosity images with cylinder pressure derived heat release rate analysis. Research results reveals the spark assistance as a proper methodology to provide temporal and spatial control over the combustion process solving the lack of cycle to cycle control on the highly premixed compression ignition modes overall in light loads with high octane number (ON) fuels. Additionally, different stages have been identified in the combustion mode. The process starts with the spark discharge, which produces a flame kernel around the spark plug that later evolves to a premixed flame front. This premixed flame front heats unburned mixture and progresses into an auto-ignition combustion that burns out the rest of the charge with higher light intensity and finally an extinction of combustion process. Finally, the effect of injected fuel mass on the combustion mode has been also tested. An increase in the injected fuel mass has a positive effect on the assistance of the spark in the combustion process for both, combustion stability and cycle to cycle control.
