Induction of ovulation by administration of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is commonly practiced in cattle to treat repeat breeders or cows exhibiting long estrous periods. This treatment may, however, disturb normal reproductive functions if timing is incorrect. The objective of the present study was to investigate the effect of exogenous GnRH on estradiol secretion of the ovulatory follicle, occurrence of ovulation, development and function of the corpus luteum (CL) and growth of a dominant follicle after ovulation in the bovine, when GnRH treatment was given before the expected physiological LH-surge. Luteolysis was induced by cloprostenol (PG) in three cows and six heifers. Every animal was assigned once to each of the following treatment or control manipulations, receiving either a single dose (0.1 mg) of GnRH (gonadorelin) at (1) 24 h (T1), (2) 48 h (T2), or (3) 72 h (T3) after PG, or (4) no gonadorelin (control manipulation, C). Ovaries were scanned by ultrasound and blood samples were collected for progesterone (P4) and estradiol-17β (E-17β) determination. Growth curves of dominant follicles between treatment 1 and the control differed significantly (P&lt;0.01). One day after ovulation, the diameter of the dominant follicle was almost 1 mm larger in T1. This difference remained almost unchanged during the entire follow-up period. The recruitment of a new follicular wave after ovulation seemed to occur earlier. Development of CL and levels and profiles of P4-production remained unaffected. When GnRH was given 1 day after PG injection, two animals showed significantly different development of CL (P&lt;0.05) and of P4-production (both in concentrations [P&lt;0.05] and profile [P&lt;0.01]). After normal ovulation and CL development, luteolysis took place on days 5 or 6 after ovulation, and animals ovulated on days 9 and 10. It is suggested that early induction of ovulation with GnRH can cause shortened luteal function in cattle and, ultimately, reduced fertility.
