The objective of the present study was to investigate the effect of post-ovulatory food deprivation on the hormonal profiles and consequently on the activity of the oviduct and ova transport in sows. Sows were randomly allocated to the control (C-group, n=6) or fasted (F-group, n=5) group. The F-group sows were fasted for four meals starting with the morning meal after detection of ovulation in the second oestrus after weaning. Ovulation was checked by transrectal ultrasonography. Blood was collected for the analyses of progesterone, oestradiol-17β, prostaglandin F2∝ metabolite, insulin, free fatty acids and triglycerides. Oviductal isthmic motility was monitored on Polyview™ before and after ovulation until the time of slaughter. After slaughter, the isthmus opposite the side with transducer was divided into three equal segments and flushed separately and a third of the uterine horn part from the utero-tubal-junction (UTJ) was also flushed. A high proportion of ova in the F-group was found in the first and second parts of the isthmus. In the C-group, a high proportion of ova was found in the third part of the isthmus and the uterus. The mean isthmic pressure in the C-group decreased significantly (P&lt;0.05) during the period immediately after ovulation while in the F-group mean pressure remained unchanged. The frequency of phasic pressure fluctuations were significantly (P&lt;0.05) higher in the F- than in the C-group 13 to 24 h after ovulation. No significant differences in progesterone concentrations were seen between the two groups of sows. Prostaglandin metabolite levels were significantly (P&lt;0.05) higher in the F-group than in the C-group. Oestradiol-17β levels significantly (p&lt;0.05) decreased earlier in the F- than in the C-group. Serum insulin levels were significantly (p=0.05) lower in the F- than in the C-group while free fatty acids were significantly (p&lt;0.01) higher in the F- than in the C-group. There were no significant differences in the serum levels of triglycerides between the F- and the C-group. Therefore, it can be concluded in the present study that food deprivation is associated with changes in the hormonal profiles, activity of the oviduct and a delay of ova transport in sows.
