Recent acceptance of frozen semen as a method to produce registered foals by two of the worlds largest breed associations, the American Quarter Horse and American Paint Horse, has stimulated new interest in frozen semen technology. This review will: (a) attempt to identify the major impediments to the development of the frozen semen industry, (b) suggest alternative methods for marketing and application of frozen semen, and (c) resent the results of a recent study in our laboratory. The objective of which was to compare pregnancy rates of insemination with cooled and frozen semen.

impediments to the development of the frozen semen industry include1.
fertility with frozen semen as compared to cooled semen for many stallions.

sed costs associated with management of mares for AI with frozen semen using current insemination protocols.

rable marketing practices for frozen semen.


s of fertility with cooled transported semen in commercial breeding programs indicate seasonal pregnancy rates ranging from 60 to 90%. We compiled data from three commercial transported cooled semen programs in which semen from 16 stallions was used for insemination of 850 mares throughout North America by local veterinarians. During the 1999 and 2000 breeding seasons, first cycle and seasonal pregnancy rates of 59.4 and 74.7% were obtained. During that same period, first cycle and seasonal pregnancy rates of 51.3 and 75.6% were obtained following insemination of 876 mares with frozen semen from 106 different stallions processed by our laboratory and distributed through our commercial distribution program. First cycle and seasonal pregnancy rates were higher for mares bred outside of North America than for mares bred within North America (53.5 and 81.9 versus 49.4 and 65.6%, respectively). Seasonal pregnancy rates were higher presumably because of the better mare management employed for mares bred with exported semen and the fact that some of the domestic mares were switched to cooled semen insemination after a failed first cycle attempt with frozen semen.

data support the position that comparable seasonal pregnancy rates may be obtained using frozen and liquid cooled semen in a commercial setting.
