Embryos from Bos indicus are more resistant to elevated culture temperature (i.e. heat shock) than embryos from some Bos taurus breeds. The present experiment was designed to determine if Brahman embryos have greater resistance to heat shock than Holstein embryos at a stage in development before the embryonic genome was fully activated. A second objective was to test breed effects on estrus synchronization and superovulation responses. A total of 29 Brahman and 24 Holstein cows were subjected to estrus synchronization using gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) and prostaglandin F2α (PGF2α) superovulation. Embryos were collected at 48 h and day 5 after insemination. There was a tendency for a lower proportion of Brahmans to be detected in standing estrus than Holsteins. There were no differences between breeds in the proportion of cows detected in estrus using both tailpaint and standing estrus as criteria or in interval from PGF2α to estrus. The degree of synchrony in estrus was greater for Brahmans. Superovulation response was generally similar between breeds. At 48 h after insemination, there was a tendency for a greater proportion of Brahman oocytes to have undergone cleavage. Uncleaved oocytes were cultured for an additional 24 h—at this time, cleavage rate was similar between breeds. When embryos reached the 2–4-cell stage, they were heat-shocked for 4.5 h at 41 °C. This heat shock reduced the proportion of embryos that developed to the blastocyst stage but there was no breed×treatment interaction. At day 5 after insemination, the number of embryos recovered was too low to allow comparison of breed effects. In conclusion, genetic effects on cellular thermotolerance that make Brahman embryos more resistant to heat shock are not expressed at the 2–4-cell stage. There were few differences between Brahman and Holstein in response to estrus synchronization and superovulation. The fact that cleavage tended to occur earlier in Brahman than Holstein embryos suggests breed differences in timing of ovulation, fertilization or events leading to cleavage.
