Low reproductive productivity of young red deer (Cervus elaphus) hinds on New Zealand deer farms appears to reflect high incidences of puberty failure at 16 months of age. This is despite the general attainment of average liveweights 15–25 kg in excess of the accepted minimum threshold for puberty in subspecies of western European origin (scoticus, elaphus and hippelaphus) that form the basis of the national herd. The present study tests the hypotheses that introgression of the larger North American wapiti subspecies (nelsoni, manitobensis and roosevelti) into breeding herds (1) can be assessed from morphological features of individuals, (2) that there is a relationship between the level of wapiti parentage and non-pregnancy rate at 18 months of age (a proxy for puberty failure) and (3) that minimum liveweight thresholds for puberty increase with increasing levels of wapiti parentage.

l of 4329 18-month-old hinds across four “red” deer farms in southern New Zealand were scanned for pregnancy status. Each hind was assigned a wapiti score (WS) as a subjective assessment of the obviousness of wapiti features. Various body measurements were additionally recorded for each hind. A hair sample was collected for DNA analysis (14 markers) to objectively assign subspecies pedigree (i.e. “Elkmeter”) on a subset of 1258 individuals. A total of 506 (11.7%) hinds were not pregnant at 18 months of age with rates varying between 4.1 and 37.3% between farms and years. Mean WS differed significantly between farms and reflected the genetic management policy of each farm. WS was positively correlated to Elkmeter for each farm/year (&lt;0.05) although regression slopes varied significantly. WS was able to be adjusted for these differences to assign a corrected WS (CWS) for all 4329 individuals that estimated the proportion wapiti parentage. Discriminant analysis of morphological variables relative to Elkmeter supported the first hypothesis and showed that shoulder height and body length were good indicators of the degree of wapiti parentage within individuals. This enabled the development of an objective estimate of wapiti parentage (EWP). The actual level of such parentage within herds ranged from &lt;5 to &gt;55%. There was a significant negative association between wapiti parentage and pregnancy, which was strongly influenced by liveweight, supporting the second and third hypotheses. This was manifest as marked displacement of pregnancy probability curves in relation to liveweight between genotype groups, particularly for those groups with &gt;20% wapiti parentage. For example, predicted threshold liveweights required to achieve a 90% pregnancy rate for EWP values that represent 0, 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50% wapiti parentage were 81, 81, 85, 106, 127 and ∼137 kg, respectively. Within the study herds, the majority of hinds of 0–20% wapiti parentage exceeded the predicted 90% threshold liveweights for their genotype cohort. However, hinds with higher levels of wapiti parentage generally fell below the predicted threshold for their genotype group. The data strongly suggest that under liveweight performance levels measured for red deer, hinds with &gt;20% wapiti parentage are at high risk of puberty failure.
