Incomplete uterine involution is the putative cause of the increased embryo mortality and reproductive failure often exhibited by sows that lactate for less than 21 days. Since such short lactation lengths are common in American swine production, an effective technique to monitor the postpartum involution process and test this hypothesis might be valuable. Rapid and extensive catabolism of uterine collagen is essential for normal postpartum involution. The objective of this study was to characterize postpartum excretion of two biochemical markers of collagen degradation. In experiment I, urine samples were collected from five sows every other day from the day before parturition (day −1), through a 21-day lactation, to day 8 postweaning. The collagen crosslinks hydroxylysyl pyridinoline (HP), which is present in many tissues, and lysyl pyridinoline (LP), which is primarily concentrated in bone, were assayed by both ELISA and HPLC. Urinary levels of both free (ELISA) and total (HPLC) HP and LP increased (P &lt; 0.001) approximately two-fold during lactation. The mean molar ratio of total HP:LP increased (P &lt; 0.001) from 6.6 ± 1.6 at day 1 to a maximum of 10.2 ± 1.5 at day 7 postpartum and averaged 9.1 ± 0.3 for the entire sampling period. These data are consistent with a postpartum increase of soft tissue collagen catabolism since bone has a low HP:LP ratio of 4 and soft tissues like the uterus have a high HP:LP ratio of ≥20 because they contain only trace amounts of LP. Since HPLC (total) and ELISA (free) crosslinks estimates were highly correlated (r = 0.85–0.91, P &lt; 0.001) in experiment I, only the less technical ELISA technique was used in experiment II. Urine samples were collected from 21 sows every third day from day 1 to 19 of lactation. Sows from this second group exhibited one of four distinct crosslinks excretion patterns: peak on day 1 (n = 3), peak on day 7 (n = 4), peak on day 10, 13 or 16 (n = 7), or no peak (n = 7). This variation of postpartum crosslinks excretion among sows was not related to parity, body weight, lactation body weight change, litter size, or litter birth weight. Overall, data from experiments I and II indicate that urinary HP does increase postpartum in a pattern temporally consistent with uterine involution. However, significant variation among sows in the magnitude and timing of peak HP excretion was evident.
