The objective of this study was to test the efficacy of an inexpensive, reusable internal artificial vagina (IAV) developed for breeding soundness evaluation of range beef bulls. In addition, sexual behavior during semen collection by IAV was compared to behavior during pasture breeding. Breeding soundness exams (BSEs) were conducted on 165 bulls in two consecutive years (96 in Year 1 and 69 in Year 2). In Year 1, BSEs were done twice in all bulls, once by a conventional protocol using electroejaculation (EEJ), followed by the IAV method, one week later. In Year 2, all BSEs were done on one day; 69 bulls by the IAV method followed by EEJ in 21 bulls that failed to serve the IAV. For semen collection using an IAV, mount cows were restrained in breeding crates and an IAV was inserted into the vagina just beyond the depth of the vestibular sphincter. After each copulation, the IAV was replaced for the next bull to be tested. Semen collection by IAV was successful for all bulls that mounted and penetrated cows during the testing period (54.3 and 69.6% of the bulls served the cows with IAVs in Year 1 and 2, respectively). Semen was collected successfully by EEJ from all bulls in both years. Differences were observed between semen collection methods in semen volume and percentage of sperm staining alive; however, the differences were opposite in Year 1 and 2 and, therefore, were probably due to natural variations in time and within bull rather than the method of semen collection. Semen collection by IAV allowed the detection of problems that prevented copulation in 8 bulls (4.8%) that were determined to be satisfactory potential breeders when semen was collected by EEJ. In Year 1, breeding observations were made at pasture for 15 bulls that served, and 15 bulls that did not serve cows with an IAV. Bulls that did not serve the IAV during the test period had fewer mounts, attempts to mount, and completed services at pasture than bulls that had served the IAV, indicating that such bulls are likely to be less efficient breeders. In conclusion, IAVs might be used as an alternative to EEJ for breeding soundness evaluation in about 50–70% of range bulls. Semen collection by IAV also allows observation of sex drive and mating ability thus improves the ability to select sound breeding bulls.
