Oxytocin is used to induce and control parturition; nevertheless, an increase in uterine contractions decreases blood flow and gaseous exchange through the uterus predisposing to intra-partum mortality in pigs. The objective of the present study was to evaluate the effect of different oxytocin administration routes on myometrial activity, fetal intrauterine hypoxia and postnatal asphyxia in crated farrowing sows. Yorkshire × Landrace hybrid sows (n = 300), that were approaching the time of parturition, were randomly assigned into six groups. Each group included 50 sows, 10 for each of the parities from one to five. A 40-IU oxytocin dosage was administered by intramuscular (IM), or intravulvar (IVU) routes, or 20 IU was administered via intravenous (IV) route. Groups 1 (G1), 3 (G3) and 5 (G5) were administered 0.9% saline solution (NaCl) IM, IVU and IV, respectively, whereas groups 2 (G2), 4 (G4) and 6 (G6) were treated with oxytocin IM, IVU and IV, respectively. There was a significantly (P &lt; 0.05) greater number of intra-partum stillbirths (IPS) for the oxytocin treatments, as compared with the control groups, especially with the IVU and IV routes; a lesser number of IPS and lesser IPS with broken umbilical cords was observed with the IM administration route. Oxytocin and control IV administration resulted in longer farrowing durations. Administration of IV-oxytocin resulted in a greater number (P &lt; 0.05) of intrauterine distressed neonates compared with its corresponding control and interpreted through dips II, a fetal cardiac frequency deceleration which determines acute fetal suffering. Independent of the route of oxytocin administration, the treatments resulted in twice as many dips II compared with the respective control groups. The use of the cardiotocograph proved to be an excellent tool for establishing the oxytocin response dose in farrowing sows. A greater number of piglets born alive, which had undergone bradycardia, also showed severe acidosis and greater meconium staining in oxytocin-treated sows, indicating that the administration time (at birth of the first piglet) as well as the dosage used were not adequate treatment regimens in the present study. Further studies will be conducted to evaluate different dosages and oxytocin administration timing to determine the most desirable treatment regimen to increase myometrial contractibility without compromising fetal welfare and neonatal survival.
