The objective of this experiment was to examine the effects of an excess intake of quickly degradable nitrogen (QDN) on metabolic and reproductive parameters in lactating dairy cows. Twenty-two lactating dairy cows were fed a total mixed ration once daily. The control diet was a typical ration for high producing cows in the UK (CP=17.5%, ME=11.8 MJ/kg DM). The cows were randomly divided into two groups, control diet (control; n=12) and excess QDN diet (QDN; n=10). The QDN group was fed an additional 250 g of urea per cow per day, from 10 days before insemination (day 0) until the end of the experiment, 17 days after the second insemination. Ten days before insemination, a synchronized oestrus was induced and the cows inseminated twice, 48 and 72 h after synchronization, with commercial frozen semen from a single sire. Ovaries were scanned using B-mode ultrasonography 10 days before insemination and then daily from 3 days before insemination. Eighteen of the cows (9 control and 9 QDN) were sampled more intensively to determine the pulsatile pattern of secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) and growth hormone (GH). Cows were slaughtered 17 days after insemination, the reproductive tracts recovered and flushed to retrieve embryos.

cess QDN diet resulted in elevated (P&lt;0.05) plasma urea concentrations 3 days after starting urea feeding and these were maintained until the end of the experiment. However, the excess QDN diet did not significantly affect daily milk production or plasma concentrations of insulin and IGF-I. The QDN treatment did not significantly affect pulsatile patterns of secretion of LH and GH or the number of small (&lt;0.5 cm diameter) and medium to large follicles (&gt;0.5 cm diameter). Twenty cows ovulated following synchronization (control 11/12; QDN 9/10). There were no significant differences between the control and the QDN groups in the peak concentrations of oestradiol during the follicular phase or in the post-ovulatory pattern of plasma and milk progesterone secretion. Embryos and/or foetal membranes were recovered from 10 cows (5 control and 5 QDN). The results of the current study show that feeding excess QDN, as urea, for 27 days commencing 10 days before insemination had no effect on reproductive or metabolic hormonal parameters. Ovulation and the formation and function of the post-ovulatory corpus luteum were also unaffected by excess QDN. These data suggest that the harmful effects of excess intakes of QDN on fertility occur after 17 days following ovulation.
