The final stages of sperm maturation, fertilization, and early embryonic development occur within the oviduct and are essential for successful reproduction in mammals. Norepinephrine was previously identified in native bovine oviductal fluid and its in vitro effects on bull sperm capacitation and the acrosome reaction have been determined. It was unknown how physiological concentrations of norepinephrine influence sperm binding, fertilization, and embryo development. Therefore, the objective of this study was to determine if pre-incubating bovine spermatozoa with physiological concentrations of norepinephrine prior to insemination of bovine oocytes would improve sperm–oocyte binding, fertilization, and embryonic development in vitro. Norepinephrine, in concentrations representing those measured in bovine oviductal fluid, was used to treat bovine spermatozoa prior to insemination. Spermatozoa incubated in norepinephrine were used to inseminate bovine oocytes matured in vitro, and oocytes were evaluated for sperm binding and fertilization. Additional experiments were conducted to evaluate how early in the co-incubation period oocytes were fertilized by spermatozoa pre-incubated with norepinephrine, and to test the developmental competence of those oocytes fertilized with norepinephrine-treated sperm. Sperm binding to the zona pellucida was reduced by pre-incubation with norepinephrine. Rates of fertilization and embryo development did not increase as a result of pre-incubating spermatozoa with norepinephrine, but as early as 4 h after insemination, spermatozoa treated with 20 ng/ml norepinephrine fertilized more oocytes than spermatozoa incubated in medium alone. Interestingly, this concentration of norepinephrine was found to capacitate spermatozoa in previous studies. These data suggest that oocytes fertilized by spermatozoa incubated in 20 ng/ml norepinephrine fertilize earlier in vitro than sperm pre-incubated in medium alone, and provide additional support for the role of norepinephrine in sperm capacitation and the acrosome reaction.
