The main objective of the present study was to characterize buffalo preantral ovarian follicles. Parts of ovarian cortex, collected from postpubertal buffalo females that were having estrous cycles at regular intervals, were selected under stereomicroscopy and processed for optic and transmission electron microscopy. Primordial follicles were characterized as an oocyte encircled by one layer of flattened cells. The buffalo primordial follicle has a mean diameter of 35 μm and the oocyte diameter is 24.9 μm. The oocyte nucleus is relatively large and eccentric; and in the cytoplasm a large amount of mitochondria, vesicles and endoplasmic reticulum cistern, mainly of the smooth type is observed. The primordial follicles cells are rich in plasma membrane invaginations, which are observed within the cell and between the cell and the oocyte. The primary follicles (mean diameter of 41.8 μm) consist of an oocyte, with a medium diameter of 26.9 μm, surrounded by one layer of cubical granulosa cells. At this follicular stage, the beginning of zona pellucida deposition can also be seen in areas between the oocyte and follicular cells. The secondary follicles, which are surrounded by more than one layer of cubical cells, have a diameter of 53.3 μm, and the oocyte has a mean diameter of 29.4 μm. The ultrastructural analysis showed a large amount of coalescent vesicles, more evident in the oocyte periphery. The zona pellucida (ZP) is thicker at this stage and contains a large quantity of glycoproteins. In general, the ultrastructure of buffalo preantral follicles was similar to that of other mammalian species, but some differences were observed, which indicate species specific characteristics. The main differences observed were cytoplasmic vesicles quantity, mitochondria shape and inner content, ZP deposition and granulosa cell–oocyte junctions. In conclusion, the morphological differences described in this paper, could be responsible for some functional differences observed in Bubalus bubalis in vitro embryo production and follicular dynamics, when compared with Bos taurus or Bos indicus species.
