The objective of this study was to determine the presence and magnitude of seasonal fluctuations in semen quality and other reproductive indices in bison bulls. Testicles from 288 commercially slaughtered bison bulls were collected monthly over a 1-year period. Carcass and testicle weight were determined and measurements of seminiferous tubule lumen, diameter, and epithelial thickness were made. Sperm cell morphology and defects were described and quantified using epididymal semen from each testicle. Twenty-one Plains (Bison bison bison) and Wood bison (Bison bison athabascae) breeding bulls, averaging 6.0 years of age (range 2.5–8.0), from three farms were selected for semen collection and evaluation on the basis of producer co-operation. Semen was collected by electro-ejaculation on four seasonal occasions during a 12-month period. Ejaculate quality was judged on the basis of volume, density, gross and individual motility, morphology, live/dead ratio, and concentration. Sperm cell morphologies were evaluated microscopically and classified according to criteria used for bovine semen. Fecal testosterone was measured at each semen collection using a commercial competitive binding radioimmunoassay. There was an increase in carcass weights over the study period and testis weights were moderately correlated (r = 0.44) with carcass weights. However, mean testes weights were heavier (P &lt; 0.05) in the summer than in winter, spring, or fall periods. There were no differences in the proportion of normal and abnormal epididymal sperm between seasons but there were seasonal changes in the testicular parenchyma. Seminiferous tubule and lumen diameter, and epithelial thickness were greatest (P &lt; 0.05) in summer. Live bulls gained weight between April and November, but lost weight over the winter. Normal sperm cell percentages as well as individual sperm cell motility in electro-ejaculated sperm samples were higher (P &lt; 0.05) at the pre-breeding collection relative to other collections, but no change in sperm cell concentrations occurred over the study period. Fecal testosterone concentrations were highest at the pre-breeding period (June) but decreased (P &lt; 0.05) in each subsequent collection to reach their lowest levels in the April. While many changes in seen characteristics were not significant, overall results indicate the presence of some reproductive seasonality and increased testicular capacity in the summer breeding season. Bulls showing marginal semen quality in the winter but otherwise carrying desirable genetic traits may warrant another evaluation in late spring prior to being culled from a breeding program.
