Achieving full in vitro growth of oocytes of both domestic animals and humans remains a major challenge. The objective of this study was to examine the in vitro development of primary follicles isolated enzymatically from cryopreserved sheep ovarian tissue. In Experiment 1, isolated primary follicles (mean diameter 60.1 ± 0.78 μm) were cultured in serum-free medium on fibronectin-coated wells for 42 days. Initially follicular structure was lost as granulosa cells plated down, but by Day 7 two distinct morphologies began to emerge. Nineteen out of 36 oocytes were gradually re-surrounded by granulosa cells, forming follicle-like units (reorganized follicles), and the remaining 17 were not (non-reorganized follicles). On Day 2, there was no difference in diameter of oocytes between reorganized and non-reorganized follicles. The diameter (mean ± S.E.M.) of oocytes of reorganized follicles increased (P &lt; 0.05) from 47.1 ± 2.2 μm to 65.3 ± 2.6 μm between Day 2 and Day 42, respectively, but that of oocytes of non-reorganized follicles showed no change. In Experiment 2, oocyte growth and granulosa cell differentiation during long-term culture of primary follicles (&gt;42 days) were examined. Oocytes of reorganized follicles reached a maximum diameter of 75.4 ± 2.0 μm, a size equivalent to that of oocytes of ovine secondary follicles. Using RT-PCR, mRNA for follicle stimulating hormone receptor was detected in granulosa cells of freshly isolated secondary follicles and of long-term cultured reorganized follicles, but not of non-reorganized follicles. In Experiment 3, we tested if the culture conditions could support further oocyte growth in secondary follicles. The oocytes from enzymatically isolated secondary follicles increased in diameter from 77.7 ± 1.6 μm to 98.8 ± 2.1 μm (P &lt; 0.05) during 28 days in culture. The changes in oocyte size and in gene expression by granulosa cells support the conclusion that isolated ovine primary follicles developed in vitro to reach the secondary follicle stage.
