Certain features of capacitated or frozen–thawed spermatozoa have been considered to be an apoptosis-like phenomenon, and, it has been suggested that the presence of apoptotic sperm in seminal doses could be one of the reasons for poor fertility. The objective of this study was to determine whether phosphatidylserine (PS) translocation, caspase activity and DNA fragmentation, which are considered to be apoptotic markers in somatic cells, occur in ram sperm. Fresh ejaculates and sperm samples in different physiological state (cold-shocked, in vitro capacitated and acrosome-reacted (AR)) were compared. Simultaneous staining with 6-carboxifluorescein diacetate (6-CFDA) and Annexin V-Cy3.18 (AnnV) revealed four different sperm subpopulations in ejaculates. The main subpopulation was composed of viable cells without PS exposure (CFDA+/AnnV−). A total of 40.8% of sperm showed inverted PS, with two levels of alteration: CFDA+/AnnV+ in midpiece (“type I AnnV+”), and in acrosome and midpiece (“type II AnnV+”). The fewest subpopulation contained non-viable cells showing Annexin labelling in the entire cell (CFDA-/AnnV+). Labeling of caspases-3 and -7 by immunocytochemistry revealing different sperm subtypes depending on their localization in apical, equatorial, post-acrosomal regions and tail. The results obtained by western-blot showed, for the first time to our knowledge, that caspase-like proteins are present in fresh ram semen as both inactive and active forms. The proportion of sperm with fragmented DNA [terminal transferase-mediated dUDP nick end-labeling (TUNEL)-positive] were found rarely (2.7 ± 0.5%) in all fresh ejaculates involved in this study. The analysis of total activity of both caspases by a fluorometric method showed a decrease in vitro capacitated and acrosome-reacted samples as well as in cryoinjured samples. However, the percentage of TUNEL-positive sperm demonstrating DNA fragmentation was significantly increased after in vitro induced capacitation and acrosome reaction, as well as after cold-shock although this augment was not significant. PS exposure is not totally dependent on caspases in ram spermatozoa as the addition of a caspase inhibitor prevented the increase in PS inversion due to incubation in capacitating conditions but not to the ionophore-induced acrosome reaction or cold-shock.
