The objective of the present study was to examine the effects of cumulus cells, cytochalasin B (CB), and taxol on the development of ovine matured oocyte following solid surface vitrification (SSV). In experiment 1, effects of cumulus cells during the vitrification were examined. Survival rates after warming were not different between ovine mature oocytes with cumulus cells and without cumulus cells. After in vitro fertilization, rates of embryonic cleavage and development to blastocyst were not different between these two groups. In experiment 2, the effects of cytochalasin B (CB) on vitrification of ovine matured oocytes were examined. The rates of survived ovine matured oocytes were not significantly different among the treatment with 0, 2.5, 5.0, 7.5 and 10.0 μg/mL CB. After in vitro fertilization, the rate of cleavage was not different between the five treatment groups. However, vitrified oocytes treated with 7.5 or 10.0 μg/mL CB resulted in a higher (8.1 ± 4.6% and 7.8 ± 2.4% respectively, P &lt; 0.05) blastocyst development rate than those of oocytes treated with lower CB concentrations. In Experiment 3, the effects of taxol on vitrification of ovine matured oocytes were examined. The rate of survived oocytes was not significantly different among the taxol treatment group with 0, 0.5, 1.0, and 5.0 μM taxol. After in vitro fertilization, the rates of embryos that reached cleavage were not different between the four treatment groups. However, vitrified oocytes treated with 0.5 μM taxol resulted in a higher blastocyst (10.1% ± 6.3, P &lt; 0.05) development rate compared to other treatment groups. In conclusion, no effect of cumulus cells on vitrification of ovine matured oocytes was detected in this study. Pretreatment of ovine matured oocytes with cytoskeletal inhibitor cytochalasin B or taxol have a positive effect and helps to reduce the damage induced by vitrification and is a potential way to improve the development of vitrified/warmed ovine matured oocytes.
