Seasonal infertility is a well-known problem in the modern swine (Sus scrofa) industry. The molecular mechanisms responsible for thermal effects on spermatogenesis are, however, just beginning to be elucidated. The existence of specific messenger RNA (mRNA) remnants contained within freshly ejaculated sperm has been identified in several species. Investigators have obtained differential RNA profiles of infertile men compared with fertile individuals; however, there are limited to the probes, which are mostly derived from nucleic acids of testicular tissues of either human or mice. The objective of this study was to investigate mRNA remnants from ejaculated sperm of the domestic swine and uncover important clues regarding the molecular regulation of spermatogenesis under environmental thermo-impacts. We utilized the remnant mRNA collected from swine ejaculated sperm as the target source to detect the global gene expression in summer and in winter by swine sperm-specific oligonucleotide microarray. Sixty-seven transcripts were differentially expressed with statistical differences between seasons of sperm samples collected, including forty-nine in winter (49/67) and eighteen in summer (18/67). There were only 33 of these transcripts that could be annotated to gene ontology hierarchy with the database of Homo sapiens and their functions mostly were involved in variety of metabolic processes. Moreover, these studies also confirmed that significant differences of gene expression profiles were found in swine sperm when comparisons were made between ejaculates collected during the winter and the summer season under the subtropical area such as Taiwan. Even though most of the genes found in our experiments are still poorly understood in terms of their true functions in spermatogenesis, bioinformatics analysis suggested that they are involved in a broad spectrum of biochemical processes including gamete generation. These concordant profiles should permit the development of a non-invasive testing protocol to assess the functional capacity of sperm as well as a new molecular selection scheme for fine breeding swine.
