The objective was to determine the effect of body energy stores, evaluated by a body mass index (BMI), and food intake (FI), on the length of the anovulatory period and ovarian activity during the seasonal reproductive transitions in Creole goats. Non-pregnant, non-lactating Creole goats (n = 28) were fed to induce two different BMI conditions: Greater (GBMI; n = 15), and Lesser (LBMI; n = 13). Each BMI group was divided into two sub-groups, which were either feed restricted (FR) or non-feed restricted (NFR). Goats in the NFR groups received a diet containing 100% of the daily maintenance requirements (basal diet), while restricted goats were subjected to alternated periods, receiving 100% (11 d) and 60% (10 d) of the basal diet, during the entire experimental period. The experiment started after does were treated to synchronize time of estrus. Serum progesterone was determined in samples obtained twice a week, and used as a criterion for determining ovulations. During the transition to the anovulatory period three transrectal ovarian ultrasonographic scans were performed in a sub-group of 12 goats (n = 3 for each treatment combination). The diameter of the largest follicle (LFD) and the total number of antral follicles ≥2 mm (TAF) were recorded. Ultrasonographic ovarian scans were performed at 21, 42 and 63 days after the beginning of the experiment, concurrently with the end of each feed restriction period. The variables of response associated with ovulation were not influenced by BMI or BMI × FI interaction. However, FI influenced length of anovulatory season, as the anovulatory period was 30 d longer (P &lt; 0.05) in the FR group as compared with the NFR group. Independently of treatments, TAF and LFD decreased from the first to the third ultrasonographic ovarian scan (13.2, 10.8 and 4.4 follicles; 3.7, 2.7 and 2.3 mm). Nevertheless, in PER 1 the number of TAF was greater (P &lt; 0.05) in the FR as compared with NFR group and the GBMI group had a larger LFD (P &lt; 0.05) as compared to the LBMI group. It is concluded, that temporal restriction in feed intake could affect the time of cessation and initiation of ovulations during the periods of transition to seasonal anestrus and return to estrous activity, and increase the length of the anovulatory period. In addition, ovarian follicular development during transition into the anovulatory period is differentially influenced by food intake and the status of body energy stores.
