The objective of the present study was to evaluate the effect of different hormonal stimulation treatments on the antral follicular population of naturalized Canindé goats. Adult goats (n = 17) having estrous cycles at regular intervals were treated with intra-vaginal sponges containing 60 mg medroxyprogesterone acetate for 11 days, combined with an application of 50 μg d-cloprostenol on the Day 8 of treatment. For ovarian stimulation, goats were distributed into the following experimental groups: (a) multiple doses (MD), with a total of 120 mg NIH-FSH P1 in five intramuscular injections (30/30; 20/20 and 20 mg) at 12-h intervals; (b) three doses (TD), with a total of 120 mg NIH-FSH P1 in three intramuscular injections (60; 40 and 20 mg) at 24 h intervals; (c) one dose (OD), which consisted of the use of 70 mg NIH-FSH P1 combined with 200 IU eCG administered intramuscularly 36 h before sponge removal. In the MD and TD groups, FSH injections were begun on the Day 8 of progestagen treatment. The ovaries of all animals were observed by transrectal real time ultrasonography (TRU) during the follicular stimulation protocols. All follicles ≥2 mm were counted, measured and classified according to greatest diameter. The ultrasonographic assessment of the ovaries provided for well-defined ovarian structures. At the time of insertion of the sponges (Day 0), significant differences were observed (P &lt; 0.05) for the mean number of large follicles between the treated groups. Meanwhile, on Day 11, the three treatments did not differ (P &lt; 0.05), regardless of the follicular category. The diameter of small follicles was similar in MD, TD and OD during the whole period of the study. In the TD group, diameter of the large follicles was less (P &lt; 0.05) on Day 10 when compared to MD and OD. However, these differences were not observed on Day 11. In conclusion, the three treatments produced comparable distribution of the follicular populations. However, the single dose treatment can be preferred because of its simplicity and efficacious follicular response.
