ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Both obesity and breast cancer risk increased dramatically during two recent decades in Iranian women. The aim of the study was to investigate the association of obesity and central (abdominal) obesity with breast cancer risk in pre- and postmenopausal women. 
METHODS: In this case- control study, 100 new patients with histological confirmation of breast cancer and 200 age-matched controls were recruited. The patients were selected from Yahyanejad and Shahid Beheshti hospitals and also Hariri cancer screening center in Babol, Iran. The controls were selected from outpatient clinic or patient's relatives in the same hospitals. Height, weight, waist circumference (WC) and hip circumference were measured by standard method at time of diagnosis and body mass index is calculated by weight and height. Demographic, fertility factors and some life style data were collected by interview using questionnaires. The adjusted odds ratio and abdominal obesity in breast cancer risk were estimated by logistic regression model. 
FINDINGS: The results showed that 48 (48%) patients were obese, 42 (42%) were overweight and 45 (45%) had central obesity while the figures for controls were 27 (13.5%), 62 (31%) and 28 (14%), respectively (p < 0.001). Weight, body mass index (BMI) and WC were significantly greater in cases compared with controls in pre and postmenopausal women (p < 0.001). The adjusted odds ratio for overweight and obesity were 9.5 (95% CI: 3.4-26.9) and 28.9 (95% CI: 9.7-86) compared with normal BMI respectively and the adjusted odds ratio for abdominal obesity was 3.8 (95% CI: 1.9-7.8). 
CONCLUSION: Overweight, obesity and central obesity increase breast cancer risk in pre and postmenopausal women. These findings imply a multiple strategy of obesity prevention for breast cancer control and also to perform breast cancer screening in overweight and obese women.
	
KEY WORDS: Breast cancer, Body mass index, Overweight, Obesity, Central obesity, Women.

