Hawaii’s agricultural sector has an immense supply of natural resources that can be further developed and utilized to produce biofuel. Transformation of the renewable and abundant biomass resources into a cost competitive, high performance biofuel could reduce Hawaii’s dependence on fossil fuel importation and enhance energy security. The objectives of the study are to evaluate the economic feasibility of selected bioenergy crops for Hawaii and compare their cost competitiveness. The selected feedstock consists of both ethanol and biodiesel producing crops. Ethanol feedstock includes sugar feedstock (sugarcane) and lignocellulosic feedstock (banagrass, Eucalyptus, and Leucaena). Biodiesel feedstock consists of Jatropha and oil palm.

onomic analysis is divided into two parts. First, a financial analysis was used to select feasible feedstock for biofuel production. For each feedstock, net return, feedstock cost per Btu, feedstock cost per gallon of ethanol/biodiesel, breakeven price of feedstock and breakeven price of ethanol/biodiesel were calculated. Leucaena shows the lowest feedstock cost per Btu while banagrass has the highest positive net returns in terms of both feedstock price and energy price.

cond approach assumes an objective of maximizing net returns. Given this assumption, biofuel producers will produce only banagrass. As an example, the production of bioenergy on the island of Hawaii is illustrated where 74,793 acres of non-prime land having a “warm and moist” soil temperature and moisture regime are available. Using average yields (static optimization), banagrass production on this acreage can yield 8.24 trillion Btus of energy (ethanol). This satisfies the State’s 10% self-sufficiency energy goal of 3.9 trillion Btus by 2010. Incorporating risk through variability in crop yields and biofuel prices separately shows banagrass as having the highest probability for receiving a positive net return. Banagrass is the leading candidate crop for biofuel production in Hawaii and the State of Hawaii ethanol goal can be achieved by allocating non-prime lands for banagrass production without compromising prime lands currently allocated for agricultural food production in Hawaii. Physical, environmental and socio-economic impacts should be accounted for in evaluating future biofuel projects.
