Inroduction & Objective According to some reports, the Increase in blood glucose level leads to structural and functional changes in reproductive system. In the present study, we attempted to investigate the effect of hydro-alcoholic leaf extract of olive (Olea europaea L.) on the levels of gonadotropin, sex hormones and spermatogenesis in diabetic male rats.
Materials and Methods: 48 adult male wistar rats each weighing about 220-250g was randomly divided into six groups of eight. These groups included: control group which left untreated; sham group which received distilled water; experimental group 1 ,received only 500 mg.kg-1 leaf extract; experimental group 2(diabetic control) receiving only Streptozotocin; and diabetic experimental groups 3and 4 receiving 250 and 500 mg.kg-1 extract respectively. The extract was administered daily by gavageing method for 21 days. Blood samples were taken from all groups and serum levels of LH, FSH, testosterone and Dihydro testosterone were measured by RIA. In this study, the histological changes in testis were cross examined and compared between experimental , control and sham groups. Data were analyzed by SPSS software using ANOVA and Tokay tests, and P < 0.05 was considered significant.
Results: Levels of LH, FSH, testosterone and Dihydro testosterone showed a significant decrease in the diabetic control group in respect to control and sham groups (P < 0.05). In the experimental groups 3and4, the concentrations of LH and testosterone increased significantly in respect to diabetic control group, whereas the serum levels of FSH and Dihydro testosterone showed a significant elevation only in experimental group 4(P < 0.05). The results indicated a significant decrease in the cell counts of spermatogonium, primaryspermatocyte , spermatid, leydig and sertoli cells in diabetic control compared with them in control and sham groups. On the contrary, the cell counts in experimental group 4 which was diabetic and  received extract of olea europaea(500 mg.kg-1) exhibited a significant increase, compared to them in experimental group 2(diabetic control). 
Conclusion: Extract hydro-alcoholic olive leaf, can reduce the side effects of diabetes on levels of gonadotropins, sex hormones, spermatogenesis and can improve pituitary – testis axsis in diabetic rat.

Keywords: Olive Leaf, Diabetes, Gonadotropins, Sex hormones, Spermatogenesis, Rat.

