Introduction & Objectiv: Diabetes Mellitus is one of the most common endocrine diseases and currently affects 382 million people. One of the problems with diabetes causes skin ulcers leading to amputation. Balancing the indigenous skin micro flora and reducing skin opportunistic pathogen play an effective role on preventing or reducing skin scars. Prebiotics are used in various industries to increase the resistance against disease and health promotion. The objective is to study the prebiotic effect of Saccharomyces cerevisiae AT-50 cell wall to inhibit the growth of gram+ive, catalase+ive cocci isolated from normal skin between the toes in diabetics. It aims to design a method for prevention of diabetic ulcers.
Material & Methods: Healthy skin between the toes in 53 diabetic patients and 50 non- diabetic patients were sampled.Gram +ive, catalase -ive strains were isolated. Saccharomyces cerevisiae AT-50 cell wall prepared by sonicator, followed by evaluating prebiotic effect of 1.5 and 3 percent of the pure cell wall on coagulase +ive isolates using well method. The inhibition zone diameter were measured in millimeters and compared as inhibitory effects.
Results: The results showed that the total count ratio of anaerobic and aerobic isolates from diabetic and non diabetic samples was 1.44 and 1.24, and the total count ratio of aerobic and anaerobic isolates from diabetic samples were 1.55 and 1.81, respectively. Also, the number of coagulase +ive gram +ive cocci isolated from skin samples from diabetes, was 75 % more than the control sample.
Conclusion: : The skin of people with diabetes, regardless of age and sex to non- diabetic healthy skin had more favorable conditions for microbial growth, especially for coagulase +ive cocci. Inhibitory effect of prebiotic Saccharomyces cerevisiae AT-50 cell wall was related to dosage.  Inherent resistance was seen in diabetic patients. These results can be used in the future as a model for the prevention, reduction and control of chronic wounds such as diabetic ulcers.
Key words: Diabet, Normal Skin, Coagulase, Prebiotic.

