Autonomy in rural production cooperatives is one of the most important structural changes that Influenced by government policies, specially happened in recent decades and in turn affect their performance. But there is ambiguity in the current performance of autonomous cooperatives, in order to be objective and stability. This study was conducted in the Hamadan province. The purpose of the research is analysis of rural production cooperatives autonomous performance and Provide strategies for their empowerment and sustainability. The objective of this research is applicable and in terms of methodology is descriptive – analytical. The statistical population is comprised of four groups, Include: members, the board and managing directors of cooperatives are at least three years since its formation,  and governmental managers and experts involved affairs of production cooperatives in the province. The officials and experts to 24 persons, as well as managing directors to 36 persons were identified through the census. Then, 13 Units of Cooperatives (35 percent of the statistical community) were considered and in the geographical directions and center of the province, sample size of cooperatives were determined as appropriate. Then were selected with simple random sampling. To determine board of directors sample size in the selected cooperative's, 65 person were identified through the census. A total of 350 sample members were identified using the Morgan Tables, and with proportionate stratified sampling, sample members were randomly selected. Data and information were obtained and collected with documentary and field methods. In field work, observation, interviews and structured questionnaire was used. Data were analyzed by SWOT models. The results showed that the most important strength point is Managing Director has a Bachelor of agricultural education, no specific model for evaluating the performance of Cooperative Managers is the most important point of weakness, having the proper soil and water resources of the cooperatives is the most important opportunity and low level of members education is the most important threat. Also, the current strategic establishment of flexibility mainly located in the WT or retreat and then in the WO or shift region. Therefore, avoiding the formation of autonomous cooperatives in rural by state and improvement activities and functioning of cooperatives to improve its performance for achieve to their goals and optimal use of opportunities, combined with reduction of threats, were proposed.
