To answer the question concerning the happiness created by the communication rationalism as the last version of rationalism, the author has compared this concept with the revelatory one recreated on the basis of Allamah Tabatabaee’s interpretation by assuming the bliss originated from the rationalism proved by the Holy Qur’an. 
The semantics and the comparison of the two concepts of “communication rationalism” as a secular narration and “revelatory rationalism” as a religious one through the methods of concord and discord of Brzeski in the allusive form, the priority of the second to the first one could be manifested. 
This comparison has been done to investigate the commonalities and differences of the two concepts in the three retrospective, cognitive, and normative facets with the following outcome.
From the retrospective view point, in “communication rationalism” the natural world would be still and the man a phenomenon as the other ones, whereas on the basis of “revelatory rationalism”, the world and the man’s life would be meaningful and objective respectively. 
The concept of happiness differentiates between the two kinds of rationalism. Cognitively, the communication rationalism would be cognition- based regardless of the external counterpart considered for the social facts, while in the revelatory rationalism; the cognition would be achieved to realize the external facts. In this regard, the area of communication rationalism is limited and constrained.
From the normative view point, the favorite of communication rationalism would be the out come of “legitimate” norms. The norms are legitimate when they are created by the public cooperation and in a relationship without any command for the public benefits. 
However, the favorite of revelatory rationalism would be the attainment of fair norms. The norms are fair if they are according to the genesis, since our social facts are of external counterpart and they are narrative of natural rules, though the two kinds of rationalism are common in the realm of social validities.

