The overall objective of this research is studying the relationship between verbal skills and satisfaction & loyalty of the costumers of aerobic clubs. It shall be considered that effective communication is one of the key elements of the managers’ success, to the extent that verbal skills of the manager & employees of an organization can ensure long-term productivity and survival of a sport club as a small organization. Thus this research studies that whether the sport clubs, in addition to internal & external marketing, need mutual marketing, that is the mutual communication with the costumers, or in other words, respecting the verbal skills in their interaction with the costumers, and that to which extent this mutual communication is effective on the costumers’ satisfaction, and their loyalty to continue attending the club. In other words, is there any relation between aerobic club managers’ verbal skills and the costumers’ satisfaction & loyalty to the aerobic clubs?
The importance of carrying out this plan is that it studies the effect of the managers’ positive interactions on the athletes’ satisfaction & loyalty. This research has been carried out in 2012 in Kerman City, and more specifically, in aerobic clubs using correlation explanatory method based on standard questionnaire. The statistical society includes a number of 3000 athletes and 46 managers from 46 aerobic clubs in Kerman City, and the statistical sample was designed, through Morgan method and random sampling method, to have 300 athletes and totally 46 managers.
The gathered data were analysed by spss software and indicated that:
-   There is a relationship between the managers’ verbal skills and the Kerman city aerobic clubs costumers’ satisfaction
-   There is a relationship between the managers’ verbal skills and the Kerman city aerobic clubs costumers’ loyalty 
Considering these findings, it can be said that, regarding the two main variables of this research, which have been studied according to the former researches and the suggested theories (Swedish satisfaction model and Katler views towards communications skills and costumers’ loyalty), all aspects of the costumers’ satisfaction and loyalty are effected by the managers’ verbal skills. In other words, in this research, the researcher comes to this conclusion that there is a significant relationship between managers’ verbal skills and costumers’ satisfaction and loyalty. Thus, this research has been successful in answering the above-mentioned question, an answer which is in turn based on scientific method and scientific tools.
   
Key words: managers’ verbal skills, costumers’ satisfaction, costumers’ loyalty and Kerman City aerobic clubs

