The objective of this study was to investigate the phosphorus distribution in the estuarine sediments of the Daliao river, intensively affected by municipal effluent and agricultural activity for about 50 years. Surface sediment samples were taken at 35 sites in the estuarine area and phosphorus species and contents of total P, Al, Fe, and Ca in the sediments were measured. Results showed that the content of total P in the sediments ranged from 230 to 841 mg kg−1, with an average of 549 mg kg−1. Ca–bound P, residual P, Al–bound P, reductant–soluble P, Fe–bound P, and soluble and loosely bound P were averagely 44.5, 21.6, 13.6, 11.7, 8.9 and 0.2% of total P, respectively. With the gradual increase of total P content, Al–bound P, reductant–soluble P, and Fe–bound P generally increased, while the rest species of P did not. This might indicate that anthropogenic P is bound to Al and Fe oxides. Regression analysis showed that Al–bound P and sum of Fe–bound P and reductant–soluble P were correlated to the contents of total Al and Fe, respectively. On the other hand, Ca–bound P was not correlated to the content of total Ca in the sediment, probably suggesting that Ca–P was mainly from authigenic marine origin. Whereas the content of total P in the estuarine sediments of the Daliao river was within the range of total P content for Chinese and worldwide river estuaries as well as coastal sediments, non-calcium apatite phosphorus content in the estuarine sediments of the Daliao river was relatively higher, indicating higher release risk and bioavailability of P in the sediment. On the other hand, the molar ratio of total Fe to total P was 16–34 in the estuarine sediments of the Daliao river, suggesting that iron oxides/hydroxides in the sediments might be able to sequester more phosphorus. Therefore, the accumulation or release of P in/from the estuarine sediments might be dependent on the external loading of P and the estuarine eutrophication may be sustained by the internal bioavailable P pools following the decrease of the external P loading.
