AbstractIntroduction
thening food safety measures in schools would improve protection of students and school staff from outbreaks of foodborne illness. The main objective of this study was to evaluate the non-conformities in prerequisite programs implementation at school foodservice.
s
escriptive study was conducted between October and December 2011 involving 88 school foodservice units at a Portuguese Municipality. Each school foodservice was audited using a hygiene-sanitary checklist including 146 statements by the same nutritionist. Prerequisite program procedures were evaluated after categorization as standard operating procedures, sanitation and hygiene procedures and procedures for receiving and storage of foods. Food safety procedures and practices were compared between cooking and distribution food units and according to the number of meals produced daily.
s
nformities were detected concerning several safety practices such as incorrect thawing, temperature control of freezing equipment and cooked food, segregation between stored food and detergents and disinfectants, procedures used for handling waste, cleaning and sanitizing.

0% of foodservice units evaluated recorded temperature of cooked meals. All foodservice units audited revealed non conformities on cleaning and disinfection practices of equipment and facilities. Adequate labeling of stored items was properly done at 85% of units. Handling waste was undertaken incorrectly by all food handlers in this survey.

s identified for inappropriate personal hygiene practices were mainly lack of resources and conditions for correct hand washing procedure.

nificant relationship was found between food safety procedures and practices and number of meals produced or served. Distribution food units failed safety checks in aspects such as food-handling practices and temperature control of cooked meals, more frequently than cooking units.
sion
s indicate an urgent need for food safety training of personnel and point out to the need of continuous supervision by managers. It is also important to define standard operating procedures that include food safety components and improve employee motivation and responsibility.
