Abstract
Human’s perception and cognition of city form based on his mutual interaction with the environment. The knowledge of urban design, which is aimed at creating a good environment for humans, tries to identify ways of deepening the relationship. It has mostly utilized the achievements of environmental psychology, but the notion of perception, as an epistemological issue, has its conceptual roots in other cognitive domains such as philosophy. Philosophy can be considered the origin of conceptualization of perception while this notion has suffered from the inattention of urban designers. The present research aimed to make maximum use of the viewpoints of Iranian philosophers on the notion of perception to identify productive achievements of philosophical opinions in this regard, including those that are applicable to urbanknowledge. It tried to attain this goal by drawing comparative analysis between philosophical achievements and those of environmental psychology.
In this study, the notion of perception was explored and investigated based on content (including issues based on the content of perception) and procedure (including issues based on its procedural structure and its design in urban design) in the following two cognitive fields: philosophy and environmental psychology. The effectiveness of the use of philosophers referred to in each section was assessed as well.
The present manuscript adopts an interpretive (non-positivistic) approach and uses the logical reasoning method to perform a comparative assessment of the viewpoints of two areas of knowledge. Research findings were tested using the Delphi method (theoretical saturation) and the principle of research. This study aimed to answer the following questions: How are the thoughts of Iranian philosophers effective for perception as compared to environmental psychology? How can the opinions of Iranian philosophers be used for explaining the nature of structure of the perception process and its application to urban design? 
Among Iranian philosophers of Islamic eras, the theories of the following famous philosophers have had the most contribution to the growth of philosophical movements in Iran: Avicenna, Sohrevardi and Mullasadra.
Research findings revealed that application of the thoughts of Iranian philosophers is useful for clarification of the nature of perception and its contents as well as refinement of the structure of perception and its phases. The process of perception has the following levels with respect to philosophy: sensory perception, imaginary perception, illusive perception and rational perception. Each of these phases is differentiated from other levels using a constructive factor. Each phase also has a specific function and product. The most important issues derived from the opinions of philosophers are presented in the following table.

 
	section	subjects	criterion	philosophy	explanations
Substantial aspect	content	Nature  of perception	process	Creative dialectic process	Both sides are frequently in the process of recreation(the universe is  being created each moment, MollaSadra)
			impressionable	Reality of perception	Reality of perception is that evidence takes the form of evidence (Sohrevardi)
			interactional	Actor based on the existence order	Presence of logical relationship between although aspect of self and degradation of its active part (IbnSina)
Rate of apprehensive activism/ rate of activism of perceptual  phenomenon
			dynamism	Plural dynamism: man, city and relation	Dynamic theory of ontology(IbnSina) and substantial motion(MollaSadra)
		Identification of effective factors	Introduction and classification of perceptual factors	Grading degrees of man’s perfection	Physical man, carnal man, rational man
Procedural aspect	structure	grading	Having frequent steps	Sensational perception, imaginary  perception,  illusory perception and intuitive perception	Sensory perception: information received through “ senses” , emphasis on physical appearance characteristics of the environment, the main condition for occurrence” presence in the environment” , the least degree of abstraction
imaginary perception: accompanying sensory characteristics with “ internal perceptions” without necessity of presence, abstraction of form from matter
Illusory perception:  understanding “ meaning” and non-sensory and without specific form reality, elimination of the condition of presence in the environment, and adoption with physical features
Rational perception: complete abstraction, perception of main substance, elimination of conditions of presence and adoption with physical characteristics ,partiality of the phenomenon, three ineligibles
Intuitive understanding:Science,free fromclassification, immediacy, certainandinfallible, the main wayof understandingreality
		Explanation of the relation	Organizing body	Abstractionandprosperity (structural factor)	Abstraction reason for discriminating perception levels(IbnSina)
Prosperity: creation of perceptual form in accordance with each level. (MollaSadra)
		Relation with components	Clearity of system relation	Variety of components with maintenance of structural relation	اAbstraction and prosperity the main reasons for organizing perception levels
	application	effectiveness	Introduction of method	Intuitive understanding	Direct and immediate method, relation through heart
			Introduction of instrument	Variety of knowledge sources	Use of resources: sense, wisdom and intuition
		External appearance	Providing the approach of external representation	Existential development	Existential development according to perception levels(MollaSadra)
		Co-integration	Connection with the world and city	Hierarchical relation	Making communication between man, city and the world
Table of principal subject of the research


 
The research adopted an interpretive approach (instead of a positivist approach) to the analysis of contents of texts. It also studied the viewpoints of the aforementioned two cognitive Results of comparison and integration of the two theoretical areas showed that environmental perception is a “subjective and objective process [12]”, which results from the interactive (mutual) relationship between the human and environment. This process has a dynamic and progressive nature. It depends on human’s constant growth and his mental construct. During the perception process, the mental image resulting from the influence of the environment is re-created to demonstrate the true essence of the environment.
The perception process is composed of distinctive steps and various functions which are classified in the following three groups: reception and selection (emotional perception); organization and preservation (imaginary perception); and interpretation and signification (rational perception). In addition, numerous factors (human and environmental) influence the process and mechanism of perception in the form of stable dynamic factors. 

Keywords: perception, urban environment, philosophy, environmental psychology, urban design


