Background and objective: Educational planning, as a principle of health education,
is both economical and the priorities of WHO and the regional community
health policymakers. The purpose of this study was to compare the
effectiveness of two training methods, namely, multimedia-based training vs.
opportunistic training, on nutritional knowledge, attitude, and behavior of primary-
school students.
Methods: This was a semi-experiential research conducted on two groups of
84 students, selected randomly from two primary schools in Jajrood County,
District 8 of Tehran. Training intervention was then made into the first group
using an opportunistic method by the teacher, and in the second group using
multimedia package. Three nutritional variables of target students, namely,
knowledge, attitude, and behavior were measured using researcher-designed
questionnaires filled out by the students in three stages: before, immediately
after, and three months after training. The results were analyzed using independent-
T and repeated-measure tests, and SPSS16 statistical software.
Results: Before intervention, no significant differences were observed between
the two groups in terms of nutritional knowledge, attitude, or behavior (p=0.93,
p=0.52, and p=0.67 respectively). After intervention, knowledge scores in both
groups increased significantly (p < 0.001). However, the attitude and behavior
scores for the two groups increased differently: p < 0.001 for the opportunistic
training group while p < 0.17 and p < 0.04 for the multimedia training group.
Conclusion: It seems that in some occasions, opportunistic training is more accessible,
less costly, and more effective than multimedia training. It is therefore
advised that teachers make optimum use of numerous opportunities during
teacher-student contact times to improve the students’ knowledge, attitudes
and behavior in health-related subjects such as nutrition, with minimum costs.
Paper Type: Research Article.
