Background and Objective:  Educational needs assessments of faculty members along with the identification of educational needs priorities may contribute to facilitate the present facilities and resources of the university and ensuring fulfillment of high goals of that university. The present study has been performed based on the identification of educational needs prioritization of Hormozgan University of Medical Sciences (HUMS) faculty members regarding their responsibilities using their own surveys. 
Materials and Methods: The present research is a descriptive cross-sectional study which was performed in 2011 in order to assess the educational needs of HUMS faculty members with the study sample of 60 cases. The tools used for this research included a researcher- made questionnaire which was regulated in conformity with the guidelines of the health ministry for the faculty members' responsibilities, survey, and review of literature. It contained 6 areas and 59 subareas. The scale used was a 6-point Likert scale which included such items as "no need", "much need" scored 1-6 in data analysis. The validity and reliability of the questionnaire was calculated by expert opinion and Cronbach Alpha was 0.85. Data were analyzed using SPSS16 software.
Results: The mean and the SD of the scores in different areas based on the priority of the scores were as follow: management activities (4/62±0/24), research (4/61±0/55), education (4/60±0/75), individual development (4/34±1/67), technical activities out of university (4/33±0/13), healthcare services, health promotion (3/79±0/9). Essay writing in English with the frequency of 44(73/3%) and the procedure of domestic and international corresponding with the frequency of 43(71/6%) ranked first and second respectively. The method of fostering critical thinking and reasoning power, preparation of study guide, teaching method, evaluating professional ethics along with data analysis skills with  frequency of 42 (70%) ranked third.
Conclusion: Faculty members need education in different areas. Therefore, regarding the results of the present study officials should pay attention to these priorities.

