The housing issue, as a longstanding and basic need of human being, has emerged as a new problem in the present era due to the population growth. The need for residential places has necessitated the transformation of traditional houses to apartments; and single-family housing has been replaced with multi -family housing. Tabriz city, as a metropolitan area in Iran, has been no exception and, therefore, followed the same path. One of the major issues in designing and planning the new residence pattern is providing a conceptual framework for determining, evaluating and diagnosis of the status quo. The present study aims to provide insight into the communal residence patterns, with two key questions: “Is it possible to assume a taxon, or taxa, of characteristics for residential complexes in Tabriz?”, and “which spatial qualities are generated by the defined typology of residential complexes in Tabriz?” The objective is to evaluate and diagnose these spatial qualities. To answer the research questions, first, there was a need to survey the status quo and to provide a framework for taxonomic classification of residential complexes. To achieve this framework, the relevant concepts and theories in residential complex design were reviewed and analyzed in order to provide an understanding of two domains: a) the criteria for typology of residential complexes and b) the criteria for evaluating the spatial qualities in various taxa of characteristics in residential complexes. The review of existing literature revealed two major criteria in classification of residential complexes: the height (number of floors), and adjacency of open/closed spaces. The literature review also identified the criteria to be used for examining the spatial qualities that are generated in various taxa of residential complexes. Those include: accessibility and permeability, distinction and readability, comfort and relaxation, social vitality and viability, safety and security, diversity and dynamics of the functions. Then, the spatial qualities in each taxon were analyzed based on these criteria. In the second phase of research, all residential complexes in Tabriz were identified by examining the city’s aerial photos and field visits. We then attempted to classify those with an emphasis on previously identified criteria. Finally, the identified taxa of residential complexes were qualitatively examined using environmental factors. The results achieved using ‘height’ as criterion indicate high frequency of low-raise residential complexes in Tabriz that is rooted in economic issues and feasibility of construction technology. Furthermore, the results achieved using ‘adjacency of open/closed spaces’ indicate high frequency of spread blocks as a strategy to overcome the space restrictions and to provide spatial diversity. Typology of residential complexes in Tabriz, using the two criteria simultaneously, shows a dominant linear taxon in low-rise complexes, a dominant spread taxon in mid-rise and high-rise complexes, high frequency of high-rise complexes in spread and free-standing taxa, and high frequency of low rise in other taxa. The assessment of the weaknesses of the typology would lead, in macro–scale to development of appropriate executive policies and strategies; in mid-scale, to design and implementation of optimal solutions; and in micro-scale, to favorable residential environments by meeting the residents' needs and satisfaction.
