Introduction

       Mining is the extraction of valuable minerals or other geological materials from the earth.  A key impact when mining  and typically comes after it, As follows  Earth Summit, problems with discarding and waste management, pulp mining, Environmental impacts of mining operations, such as explosions, damage to land, noise, traffic problems and problems with water quality and mine rebuilding.
  Many studies in the field of mining and environmental degradation has negative consequences. (Azari and Radaee, 1389; Gerami and Soltani, 1389; Hafezi et al, 1387; Kamkar, 1384, Amini ,1375). Ignatius (2009) studied the effects of anthropogenic mining has on the environment in Nigeria. Nawz et al (2004) investigated  the impact of mining on geomorghology using GIS and remote sensing techniques to study the changes induced by mining deals. Skalos and kasparova (2011) stated that identified and determine the normal and abnormal land scape may be with the concept of physical storage land scape. modabberi and Moore (2004) in a study, examined impact of mining activity in important gold mine in iran . Haley (2003), In an article entitled urgent need for protection of coastal landscapes of New Zealand has introduced threats to the coastal landscapes. Zpanska and Tvardvska (1999) studied  Environmental impact of coal mining activities in range Avprsaylsa in  the country of Poland. The objective of this study was to evaluate the impact of mining operations on the property land scape  geomorphological and offering compatible model  mining consistent with geomorghological stable of land scape.
The study area, Mines Lashotor in the South East of Isfahan between latitude 43 26 ? 32 north and longitude 05 48 ? 51 East is located 15 kilometers from the city BAHARESTAN.
2- Methodology
  In this article AHP model that are one of the MADM techniques  efficient and Founded Based on   Paired comparisons and Has been used Allows Managers Evaluate different scenarios. TOPSIS  is one of the most common and widely used methods among the methods of MADM that is based options distance from the positive ideal solution and negative ideal. 
3– Discussion
In this study,it has been identified  the most important criteria influencing  in degradate geomorphological landscape caused by mining activities that 8 The degradation factor  are: Removal of ore, the destruction of vegetation, the  surface affected by roads to mine,  the surface of destruction the scope  accordance with mining operation, the slopes opposed with  mining that waste accumulated on the steep slope, the slope agrees with the mining operation and economic – social criteria. All criteria were measured using Google Earth software and satellite imagery and. Using VIKOR, was used 4 standard view of the city, view of the road,distance  from town and the distance  from the road, are calculated the economic – social criteria. In this study, the AHP method was used the weighting to measure for this purpose was used Expert Choice 2000 software. Then, using of  standard weight VIKOR model obtained weight  socio – economic criteria for each of the 6 positions.  Since it is the ultimate goal of providing a spatial model of landscape degradation are presented  3 different scenarios for measures 8 items. In each scenario is different weight of the criteri  based on target and therefore in each scenario are presented several results That these results can be used in areas where the mining operation. Under any scenario, we will see different representations of the 6 positions in each area will be different prioritization based on importance each criteria 
In the first scenario, which is considered degraded landscapes geomorphological are prioritized criteria in the following order. the destruction of lamdscape,  the surface of destruction the scope  accordance, the destruction of vegetation, the  surface affected by roads to mine, Removal of ore, the slope agrees with the mining operation, he slopes opposed with  mining,  economic – social criteria. 
After the TOPSIS steps to reach values between 0 and 1  that the value  is close to 1 , would be  represents a desirable or undesirable, depending on how you interpret the profit or loss. 
The second scenario is considered in terms of  environmental, prioritization  criteria  in order of importance: 
the destruction of vegetation, the  surface affected by roads to mine, Removal of ore, economic – social criteria, the destruction of lamdscape, the surface of destruction the scope  accordance, the slope agrees with the mining operation, the slopes opposed with  mining, 
order of importance  8 criteria in the three scenario  that is considered  location of mining is as follows: 
Removal of ore,  the slope agrees with the mining operation, the slopes opposed with  mining, the  surface affected by roads to mine, the surface of destruction the scope  accordance, the destruction of lamdscape, the destruction of vegetation.
4– Conclusion
Since in the first scenario  is considered impaired land scape  due to the results obtained, is a priority position 6 high rates of degration. position 3 is also slightly different, with high degration.  Other locations  are  ranked thus : position 4, position 5, position 1 and position 2.
It follows from the results of the second scenario, the position 6 of the most environmental damage has Other positions of environmental degradation are ranking thus: position 5, position 4, position 3, position 1 and position 2.
In the the three scenario, position 3  despite of the landscape and environmental degradation is the best  area  the  mining. Position 6 is in good condition for mining. positions 5, 4, 2 and 1 are  considered the second and third.

