The objective of this study was to assess daily self-selected mineral intake of free-living African-American adults using the duplicate portion collection technique coupled with direct chemical analysis. A duplicate sample of every food and beverage consumed was collected by each subject. The collection period was for 3 days (Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday) of 1 week in 1986. The chemical analysis included calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, sodium, potassium, manganese, iron, copper, zinc, and phytate. Forty adult African-Americans (20 females and 20 males) living in the Washington, DC area volunteered to participate. They were apparently healthy, ranging in age from 21 to 65 years, with a median age of 38.5 years. The analytical data from the daily food and beverage intake were compared with the Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA)/ Estimated Safe and Adequate Daily Dietary Intakes (ESADDI). The results were also compared with data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) III and USDA's Continuing Survey of Food Intakes by Individuals(USDA-CSFII 1989–91). Compared with the RDA/ESADDI, for women, the median intakes of less than two-thirds the recommendations were : calcium (54%), magnesium (65%), iron (61%), copper(60%), zinc (61%), and potassium (50%) as determined by chemical analysis. For the men, applying the same criteria, the minerals and percentages are: calcium (64%), magnesium (56%), copper (60%), zinc (61%), and potassium (58%). The phytate:zinc and phytate × Ca:Zn molar ratios suggested no general inhibition of zinc bioavailability despite some higher than suggested limiting molar ratios found in a few individual daily diets. Although limited in scope, these results suggest that African-American adults are selecting diets that are frequently low in specific minerals. Some of these essential nutrients have been implicated in chronic health problems prevalent in this ethnic group; e.g., hypertension and cardiovascular diseases. Therefore, nutritionists and other health professionals should emphasize the need for a wider selection of foods to prevent specific mineral deficits. These foods might include acceptable dairy products, meats/seafood, and mineral-fortified cereals/breads and juices.
