Climate change resulting from global warming
is currently one of the global environmental issues of
concern. Trees play a very important role in mitigating this
problem through sequestrating carbon dioxide which is one
of major green house gases. The importance of trees is
incontestable; they have many environmental, social and
economic benefits, therefore, effective community
participation can be an important strategy in ensuring
adequate tree cover. In Kenya, environmental degradation
occasioned by low tree cover is evident. The current tree
cover in the study area is approximately 3% which is far
below the recommended national level of 10%. It was
important for a study to be carried out to establish the tree
species (indigenous and exotic) available in the study area
with a view to knowing the tree types that can be given
priority when increasing tree cover. Therefore, the objective
of this study was to determine the dominant tree species
which can be used to increase groundcover and their
distribution in Bondo and Siaya sub-counties, Siaya County.
This study employed a cross-sectional survey research design.
Reliability of 0.710 was realized when pilot tested. A total of
120household heads were interviewed of which 67% were
women and 33% were men. Data analysis used Statistical
Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) software for qualitative
data, resulting in tables, numbers and percentages The study
concludes that common indigenous tree species are; Cassia
siamea (Obino), Markhamia lutea (Siala), Acacia spp
(Ali/Laktar/Kudho), Euphorbia triculli (Ojuok), and Albizia
zyiyia (Otur-bam) and for the exotic tree species in the area
area are; Thevetia peruviana (Achak/Maua), Eucalyptus spp
(Bawo/ Kaladal/ Nyar-maragol), Grevillea robusta (Bole
bole), Mangifera indica (Mawembe) and Ocotes americana
(Avocado). Any planned increase in ground cover should give
the identified species of trees priority for they have adapted
themselves to local climatic conitions.
