Background: A number of Traditional Chinese
Medicine (TCM) preparations are being used for the
treatment of diabetes mellitus. Some components
of these preparations have biochemical effects other
than those of lowering blood glucose and indeed have
been used for other medical indications in traditional
practice. The primary objective of the study was to
determine the effect of the oral mixture of Traditional
Chinese Medicine for diabetes (TCM-D™ complex) on
blood glucose level and the biochemical changes if any,
on the liver (ALT, AST, gamma-GT, albumin, globulin)
and renal (blood creatinine, urea) functions in normal
mice. The oral mixture is an aqueous extract of four wellknown
traditional Chinese medicinal herbs and consists
of Trichosanthes kirilowii Maxim., Paeonia lactiflora Pall.,
Glycyrrhiza uranlensis Fisch., and Panax ginseng (red)
CA Meyer in the proportion of 36%, 28%, 18%, and
18% respectively of the dry weight. These herbs have
been shown to have blood glucose lowering activity and
have been used for other traditional medicinal purposes.
The safety of the combination was evaluated in the
present study.
Methods: Experimental Balb/c mice were treated orally
via gastric tube with the extract at daily doses equivalent
to 1 and 10 times the recommended human dose for
8 weeks. Blood glucose and other biochemical profiles
were monitored at pre-treatment and monthly posttreatment
until killed.
Results: When compared to pre-treatment levels, the
blood glucose levels were significantly lower in treated
animals compared to those in the control group. At
the recommended TCM-D™ dose the levels in treated
animals were significantly lower than that of control
animals and at pre-treatment. When compared with
pre-treatment, the glucose levels were lowest at Week
8 of treatment, the mean levels being 111.23%, 83.32%
and 70.33% in control, and in animals given 1 x and
10 x the recommended TCM-D™ dosage respectively.
The blood glucose lowering effect was also associated
with a significant weight loss in treated animals. There
were transient increases in AST and ALT levels but
these reverted to normal at Week 8 of treatment.
The levels of bilirubin, g-GT, albumin, creatinine
and blood urea were also not significantly different at
Week 8 from pre-treatment levels in all groups.
Conclusion: Even at 10 times the dosage recommended
for humans, TCM-D™ did not affect the liver and
renal functions of treated animals. Treated and control
animals remained healthy and normal throughout the
period of observation.
