The Mediterranean area of Southern Italy is characterized by different natural plant covers that mainly reflect different successional stages (i.e. low maquis, high maquis, Quercus ilex wood) and managed areas with introduced plant species (such as Pinus species). Soil properties could be affected by plant cover types as well as by plant species. Our objective was to determine the relationships of plant cover types and plant species with the chemical and biological characteristics of the soil. In four neighbouring areas with different plant cover types (low maquis, pure high maquis, high maquis with pines and pinewood, with pines planted by foresters in both cases), soil samples were collected under different plant species in order to evaluate the effect of plant cover types and plant species on soil properties. Soil samples were analyzed for nutrient content, microbial biomass, soil potential respiration and enzymatic activity (phosphatase, arylsulphatase, β-glucosidase and hydrolase activities) as well as for pH, water holding capacity (WHC) and cation exchange capacity (CEC). Application of cluster analysis and principal component analysis to the data revealed that the plant cover type was the key factor influencing soil properties more than plant species. In fact, the largest differences were observed between pure high maquis soils and all other soils, with pure high maquis soils generally showing the highest values of WHC, CEC, nutrient content, organic and microbial C, soil respiration, phosphatase, arylsulphatase and β-glucosidase activities. The significantly lower values of these variables in the low maquis relative to the pure high maquis probably reflect the effect of ecological succession on soil. The high maquis with pine, differing from the pure high maquis only for the presence or absence of pine, showed values of soil physical, chemical and biological characteristics similar to those found in the low maquis, thus suggesting that the presence of pine retards soil development.
