Abstract
Purpose: The objective of this research is to identify the occurrence rate , publication style and type of topics related to library and information science that were found in widely read newspapers in 1390 (2011).
Methodology: In this research, the content analysis was used in order to investigate library and information science topics in widely read Iranian newspapers. The The statistical subject matter used consisted of all widely read newspapers in Iran in 1390 (2011). The samples were selected in two stages: At first, ten popular widely read newspapers were selected through a survey of 100 persons. Then, for each newspaper title, two statistical weeks were determined, one for the first six months of the year and other for the second six month of the year.
Findings: The findings that resulted from the content analysis of 120 issues of widely read Iranian newspapers published in 1390 (2011) indicated that topics related to library and information science had been mostly covered by the “Jam’e Jam” and “Ettela’at” newspapers. Furthermore, the findings showed that most of the content related to the field of library and information science had been presented in a matter-of-fact, journalistic style. A major part of the related content displayed a reactive and event-oriented nature. In addition, according to the findings of this study, the distribution of concepts and issues related to the fields of  "librarianship" and "information science" in the newspapers has not been properly managed, with a high percentage of the related content being devoted to library events.
Originality/Value: There is no evidence within the literature on subject analysis of  topics related to library and information science in widely read Iranian newspapers. Accordingly, this research work can provide a clear picture of topics related to library and information science in widely read newspapers. Furthermore, the results of this study can help the officials and planners of the newspapers concerned to consider the balance of reflecting different topics in their publications.

