The mycorrhizal, rhizosphere and basal components of soil respiration were partitioned in a barley field experiment with the main objective of determining the controlling effects of photosynthetic activity and temperature on soil respiration sources. Micro-pore meshes were used to create both root and mycorrhiza-free soil cores over which collars for soil respiration measurements were inserted. Differences between mesh treatments were used to determine the contribution of each component. With a focus on the growing season, we analyzed the response of respiration sources to photosynthesis, temperature and moisture, as well as changes in microbial biomass, mineral nitrogen and carbon–nitrogen ratios responding to treatment and time of year. Results gave clear differences between sources in their response to both temperature and photosynthetic activity and showed that several processes are involved in determining respiration rates as well as apparent temperature relations. In particular, the respiration of arbuscular mycorrhizal hyphae was seen to be a significant amount of root derived carbon respiration (25.3%) and consequently of total assimilated carbon (4.8%). This source showed a stronger response to photosynthetic activity than the rhizosphere component (r2=0.79, p&lt;0.001 and r2=0.324, p=0.53, respectively). Q10 values—the increase in respiration rates with a 10 °C increase in temperature—changed seasonally and showed temperature relations being dependent on the presence of mycorrhizal and rhizosphere respiration sources, as well as on plant development. Respiration from mycorrhizal hyphae and the rhizosphere showed no response (r2=0, p&lt;0.99) or low response (r2=0.14, p&lt;0.01) to temperature, respectively. We conclude that the potential importance and controls of mycorrhizal fungi respiration in croplands are comparable to those observed in other ecosystems, and that temperature response curves should be carefully interpreted given that substrate availability and plant dynamics strongly regulate respiration rates in ecosystems.
