
The present article is adapted from a survey on analysis of value orientation (individualistic-collectivistic) differences between two generation cohorts, based on 246, face-to-face interviews conducted with individuals between 18-60 years old who were randomly chosen from Tehran's different districts using stratificated mutli-stage cluster sampling method.
The aim of this research is to recognize and compare value orientation differences (individualistic-collectivistic) between the youth (18-29 years old) and the adult generation (40-60 years old), and to measure the relationship of value orientation with current socioeconomic status (objective) and sociolizaiton (subjective) of generations, and to analyze these differences and their cause and effects. Hence, at first, an overview of value orientations of generations and their differences is illustrated, and then, those differences are sociologically analyzed within framework of age stratification or generational class.
The data indicate that although the youth is more individualistic and the adult is more collectivistic, finding value orientation differences between the two generations is only sginificant in middle class. Also, the results of power (subjective and objective) variable impact on individualism-collectivism values indicate that the difference of value-orientations among generation cohorts is correlated to the ability of decision making of generation cohorts in strategic domains of their life. The correlation of sex variable and value-orientation is significant. This correlation has been confirmed between youth generation of men and women in terms of individual values. Namely, men are more individualistic than women of the same generation.
Findings are also compatible with the assumptions of the theoretical age stratification and structural approach conflict in determining the generation cohort value orientations. In fact, this compatibility strongly confirms the basic approach of current study.
Keywords: Age Stratification, Generation Cohorts, Individualism-Collectivism, Objective Power, Subjective Power and Sex

