Background & Objective: Factors effective in the continuous nursing education process may motivate nurses to participate in continuous education programs, and thus, result in knowledge promotion and improvement of skills in clinical practice and improvement of patient care. However, they may also prevent the achieving of these goals. The precise recognition of these factors can result in constructive modification in continuous education programs and achieving of the goals of continuous education (improving patient care). Thus, the aim of this study was to explain the factors influencing the successful implementation of the continuous nursing education process based on the experiences of nurses.
Methods: This qualitative study was conducted in 2012. The study subjects consisted of 28 individuals, including nurses, nursing supervisors, and nursing managers. The participants were selected using purposive sampling method. Data were collected through unstructured interviews and field notes. In addition, data analysis was conducted using content analysis.
Results: From the data, 3 main categories of "advantage of compulsory education", "appropriate context for education", and "passive training" were achieved. The sub-categories of these 3 categories consisted of compulsory training regulations and gaining advantage from training, various sources of education, suitable educational conditions, educational willingness, commitment to education and educational competency, insufficient educational motivation of employees and managers, inadequate educational qualification of nursing managers, and passive educational supervision.
Conclusion: The identification of motivational factors and barriers of the continuous nursing education process based on nurses ' experiences can assist continuous education program policy makers and planners and nursing managers in the development of continuous education regulations based on effective programs and activities.
Keywords: Qualitative research, Nurses, Effective factors of continuous education, Content analysis,
