This work describes the results of investigations carried out to examine the adsorption kinetics of 4-chlorophenol (4-CP) from aqueous solution containing tert-butyl alcohol (10%, v/v) onto granular activated carbon (GAC) in the presence of ultrasound of different high frequencies (516, 800 and 1660 kHz) and acoustic powers (15.2, 21.5, 31.1 and 38.3 W). The main objective of this study is to describe the mechanism of ultrasound-assisted adsorption rather than the enhancement of adsorption capacity. Sonochemical degradation of 4-CP was studied in the absence and presence of tert-butyl alcohol. The sonolysis of 4-CP is effectively inhibited by the addition of tert-butyl alcohol (10%, v/v) and very little 4-CP degradation occurs, indicating that little or no pyrolysis of the compound occurs. Without addition of tert-butyl alcohol, after 300 min and at 1660 kHz, the removal of 4-CP in the presence of ultrasound for an acoustic power of 38.3 W was nearly total (99%), but in the conventional method only 60% was eliminated. In this case, the removal of 4-CP by GAC in the ultrasound-assisted technique is due to both adsorption and ultrasonic degradation, but the removal by simple stirring is only due to adsorption, which makes a direct comparison unacceptable. In order to distinguish sonochemical degradation and adsorption of 4-CP onto GAC and to make an exact and practical comparison of the adsorption in the absence and presence of ultrasound, kinetic adsorption experiments were conducted using aqueous solution containing 10% (v/v) tert-butyl alcohol. The obtained results show that both adsorption rate and adsorbed amount were significantly enhanced and improved in the presence of ultrasound for all the studied frequencies and powers. The enhancement of adsorption is favored by increasing ultrasonic power. Adsorption kinetic data were modeled using the liquid-film mass transfer equation and intraparticle diffusion model. The values of the intraparticle diffusion coefficient obtained in the presence of ultrasound are greater than that obtained in the absence of ultrasound. In the initial period of adsorption, where external mass transfer is assumed to predominate, liquid-film mass transfer coefficients significantly increased by the assistance of ultrasound. These results indicate that ultrasound enhances the mass transport in the pores as well as across the boundary layer. This effect increased with increasing ultrasonic power for the three studied frequencies. The average order for the studied ultrasonic waves according to the initial adsorption rate, the intraparticle diffusion coefficient and the liquid-film mass transfer coefficient is 516 kHz &gt; 800 kHz &gt; 1660 kHz.
