It has been proven that ultrasound irradiation can enhance the rate of heat transfer processes. The objective of this work was to study the heat transfer phenomenon, mainly the heat exchange at the surface, as affected by ultrasound irradiation around a stationary copper sphere (k = 386 W m−1 K−1, Cp = 384 J kg−1 K−1, ρ = 8660 kg m−3) during cooling. The sphere (0.01 m in diameter) was immersed in an ethylene glycol–water mixture (−10 °C) in an ultrasonic cooling system that included a refrigerated circulator, a flow meter, an ultrasound generator and an ultrasonic bath. The temperature of the sphere was recorded using a data logger equipped with a T-type thermocouple in the center of the sphere. The temperature of the cooling medium was also monitored by four thermocouples situated at different places in the bath. The sphere was located at different positions (0.02, 0.04 and 0.06 m) above the transducer surface of the bath calculated considering the center of the sphere as the center of the reference system and was exposed to different intensities of ultrasound (0, 120, 190, 450, 890, 1800, 2800, 3400 and 4100 W m−2) during cooling. The frequency of the ultrasound was 25 kHz. It was demonstrated that ultrasound irradiation can increase the rate of heat transfer significantly, resulting in considerably shorter cooling times. Higher intensities caused higher cooling rates, and Nu values were increased from about 23–27 to 25–108 depending on the intensity of ultrasound and the position of the sphere. However, high intensities of ultrasound led to the generation of heat at the surface of the sphere, thus limiting the lowest final temperature achieved. An analytical solution was developed considering the heat generation and was fitted to the experimental data with R2 values in the range of 0.910–0.998. Visual observations revealed that both cavitation and acoustic streaming were important for heat transfer phenomenon. Cavitation clouds at the surface of the sphere were the main cause of heating effect. The results showed that closer distances to the transducer surface showed higher cooling rates. On the other hand, despite having a bigger distance from the transducer, when the sphere was located close to the gas–liquid interface the enhancement factor of heat transfer was higher. Ultrasound irradiation showed promising effect for the enhancement of convective heat transfer rate during immersion cooling. More investigations are required to demonstrate the behavior of ultrasound assisted heat transfer and resolve the proper way of the application of ultrasound to assist the cooling and/or freezing processes.
