Frequently the design of schemes for correction of aberrations or the determination of possible operating ranges for beamlines and cells in synchrotrons exhibit multitudes of possibilities for their correction, usually appearing in disconnected regions of parameter space which cannot be directly qualified by analytical means. In such cases, frequently an abundance of optimization runs are carried out, each of which determines a local minimum depending on the specific chosen initial conditions. Practical solutions are then obtained through an often extended interplay of experienced manual adjustment of certain suitable parameters and local searches by varying other parameters.

r, in a formal sense this problem can be viewed as a global optimization problem, i.e. the determination of all solutions within a certain range of parameters that lead to a specific optimum. For example, it may be of interest to find all possible settings of multiple quadrupoles that can achieve imaging; or to find ahead of time all possible settings that achieve a particular tune; or to find all possible manners to adjust nonlinear parameters to achieve correction of high order aberrations. These tasks can easily be phrased in terms of such an optimization problem; but while mathematically this formulation is often straightforward, it has been common belief that it is of limited practical value since the resulting optimization problem cannot usually be solved.

r, recent significant advances in modern methods of rigorous global optimization make these methods feasible for optics design for the first time. The key ideas of the method lie in an interplay of rigorous local underestimators of the objective functions, and by using the underestimators to rigorously iteratively eliminate regions that lie above already known upper bounds of the minima, in what is commonly known as a branch-and-bound approach.

 enhancements of the Differential Algebraic methods used in particle optics for the computation of aberrations allow the determination of particularly sharp underestimators for large regions. As a consequence, the subsequent progressive pruning of the allowed search space as part of the optimization progresses is carried out particularly effectively. The end result is the rigorous determination of the single or multiple optimal solutions of the parameter optimization, regardless of their location, their number, and the starting values of optimization.

thods are particularly powerful if executed in interplay with genetic optimizers generating their new populations within the currently active unpruned space. Their current best guess provides rigorous upper bounds of the minima, which can then beneficially be used for better pruning. Examples of the method and its performance will be presented, including the determination of all operating points of desired tunes or chromaticities, etc. in storage ring lattices.
