Abstract
No discourse is lack of place. Place explicitly or implicitly impact on formation and production of meaning.
Place interchange the form of discourse and content. In some cases place would be presented absolutely
physically and objective in some other cases, these objective functions are weakened and change to abstract
function. Objective places have interactive specification where transcendental places have imaginative
ones. How do discourse can change to challenge place and there for change to reactive position? In fact,
unboundary, running away from objective limitation, phenomenal experience, expanding imaginative
aspect and etc. are such factors which weaken interactive functions of place. In this paper the attempt has
been made to examine discourse pattern of place which plays an important role in production of meaning.
Such as place–Network. Such a place is called inductive place. A Place which affects and creates an idea
in the mind of actor. It is named because our place is separated at specific distances and in a defined
distance, changes into two place Until eventually something transfer from one to the another That is due
to the action, place acquires spatial trans feature This feature also can be generalized to a virtual places
such as cyber places. Subject in virtual place has the potential to be present simultaneously in different
geographic points. Another discourse patterns for place, is continuous place. This type of places are places
that Contrary to a network places, nothing can separate them from each other. Another issue to be dealt
with are vortical places with self-contained function This place is also a place breaker and astonishes the
actor This Place appears in front of the actor and then collapses and eventually astonishes the actor. Finally
in this paper transcendence of Place has been examined. In this kind of place presence and thought of the
actor has not been stopped and continues beyond that and reaches transcendence. The main purpose of this
research represents how transcendental of place and movement toward space relying on Canale komeil
play. No doubt, the play discourses a suitable sample for surveying the changing place and passing by meta
place, because it can enter to scene and to be dramatized.
