Playing has significant psychological and Physical effects on children. Today, spaces in cities do not respond to needs of this daily activity in children, because in modern cities, private spaces, semiprivate spaces and public places are insufficient and not safe enough for children to play freely. In some cases, these play areas are located in places that have harsh effects on children’s play as far as safety, consistency of applications, area, distance and some other features are concerned. These play areas sometimes interfere with parallel applications. Therefore, planning and quartering of specific spaces for children’s play indoor space allocations is necessary. Using intelligent soft wares in localization is effective in improving the accuracy and speed of this process. The objective of this research is planning and selection of the most appropriate places for allocation to play areas for children. Furthermore, it aims to investigate and introduce influential measures in quartering. To this end, a mixture of GIS, AHP, and determination of the spatial and non-spatial measures is used for allocation of space to play areas in neighborhood of the forth area of Isfahan. According to the municipality of Isfahan, KerdAbad neighborhood is one of the two deteriorated textures of this area. Considering the hypothesis of this study, it seems that consistency of applications is more important than other measures, and not counting the existing one, two other play areas will be sufficient at this location. In the space analysis GIS or screening step, weighting the measures was done using views of the experts and the Expert Choice software. Then, in the evaluation of the extracted choices step, better choices were selected. The selection was made from among eleven selected lane play area choices using the AHP method. Suggested maps, considering appropriate radial access and the most convenient sites are provided. Effective measures in screening step included: the present population, the price of the place, legitimate applications, consistency of applications and access. Each of these criteria has sub criteria. Furthermore, effective measures in evaluation step included: site legible effects in allocation, the role of the site as the center of crisis management, the effects of sit’s added value, lack of distraction and contaminant at the work places, slope and site inundation for aquifer, easy access to population, microclimatic effects, and the possibility of implementation.
Among the measures, due to supervision step, the application of the present situation and access weigh heavier than the other measures. The best sites, number 2, 6 and 3 and allocation sites number 1 and 2 are offered in different suggested and mixed maps. They are considered to have appropriate radial access and maximum coverage surface.
The research method used was descriptive-imaginative. The instruments used were attributive studies, surveys, questionnaire and observation. Results showed that dividing the measures into two types of spatial and non-spatial and mixing the two methods, the impairments of both are removed, because the measures are not always the same. Finally, some patterns are suggested for selecting allocation and lane play areas. Welfare of the children and the inhabitants are considered in the selection process. According to the area of the allocation and the appropriate suggested radial access in the study (200-350 meters for play area in the lane and 400-800 meters in the allocation), 1 square meter capitation is allocated for each person. Therefore, a play area of 5000 square meters and two to three lane play areas which equals to 1000 square-meters was suggested for the allocation with 7000 people in Kerd Abad. According to findings of this study and different scenarios, it is suggested that number 1 allocation site and number 2, 3 and 8 lane sites to be given priority over the others. These sites are safe, appropriate and available places. They, also, are consistent with other applications and their implementation is feasible under the best conditions. By using this pattern, it is possible to select appropriate play spaces in space planning for other lanes and allocations. Play spaces in allocations not only increase interest of the inhabitants, especially children, to their allocation but also causes dynamism, especially in deteriorated textures. It is necessary to mention that in various climates and circumstances of Isfahan (tropical to temperate) some criteria should be revised. Some suggested future studies include: investigation of quartering of zones in sites, planning of creative play areas, planning of play zones, investigation of fundamentals of designing play zones, planning of the safety of play areas, quartering of play areas and play sites using other methods and models.

