Background and Objective: Responding to holistic needs of patients can reduce anxiety. The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of holistic cares with family participation on attitude and preoperative anxiety of patients.
Materials and Method: This quasi-experimental study was conducted on all patients undergoing prostate surgery during 2012 at Emam Reza Hospital, Birjand, Iran. Therefore, 68 patients were assigned randomly to two groups of 34. In the intervention group, prior to each preoperative care, physical, social, psychological, religious, and cultural needs of patients, such as covering the body, were determined through 5 questions and cares were provided accordingly with family participation. The control group received routine cares. Intervention outcomes were the scores of attitude and anxiety of patients. The attitude toward preoperative cares was measured using a 10-item researcher-made questionnaire at admission and before hospital discharge. Anxiety and preoperative information were measured using the Amsterdam Preoperative Anxiety and Information Scale at the beginning of hospitalization and before surgery. The validity and reliability of scales were confirmed through assessment of professors and Cronbach's alpha, respectively. Data were analyzed using SPSS software version 16 and chi-square, and independent and paired t-tests.  
Results: Total score of mean attitude toward preoperative cares of the intervention group (42.44 ± 8.07) was higher than the control group (36.82 ± 9.32) (P = 0.01). Furthermore, the total mean preoperative anxiety score of the intervention group (14.08 ± 2.72) was lower than the control group (16.02 ± 1.56) (P  <  0.001) and had reduced compared with pre-intervention (15.32 ± 2.60) (P  <  0.001).
Conclusion: Providing preoperative holistic cares with family participation was effective in creating positive attitude and reducing anxiety in anxious patients. Thus, its use is recommended in providing all medical and nursing cares.  

Keywords: Preoperative care, patient satisfaction, anxiety, surgery, attitudee

