Objectives
l volume effect (PVE) is a major source of bias in brain SPECT imaging of dopamine transporter. Various PVE corrections (PVC) making use of anatomical data have been developed and yield encouraging results. However, their accuracy in clinical data is difficult to demonstrate because the gold standard (GS) is usually unknown. The objective of this study was to assess the accuracy of PVC.

-three patients underwent MRI and 123I-FP-CIT SPECT. The binding potential (BP) values were measured in the striata segmented on the MR images after coregistration to SPECT images. These values were calculated without and with an original PVC. In addition, for each patient, a Monte Carlo simulation of the SPECT scan was performed. For these simulations where true simulated BP values were known, percent biases in BP estimates were calculated. For the real data, an evaluation method that simultaneously estimates the GS and a quadratic relationship between the observed and the GS values was used. It yields a surrogate mean square error (sMSE) between the estimated values and the estimated GS values.
s
eraged percent difference between BP measured for real and for simulated patients was 0.7±9.7% without PVC and was −8.5±14.5% with PVC, suggesting that the simulated data reproduced the real data well enough. For the simulated patients, BP was underestimated by 66.6±9.3% on average without PVC and overestimated by 11.3±9.5% with PVC, demonstrating the greatest accuracy of BP estimates with PVC. For the simulated data, sMSE were 27.3 without PVC and 0.90 with PVC, confirming that our sMSE index properly captured the greatest accuracy of BP estimates with PVC. For the real patient data, sMSE was 50.8 without PVC and 3.5 with PVC. These results were consistent with those obtained on the simulated data, suggesting that for clinical data, and despite probable segmentation and registration errors, BP were more accurately estimated with PVC than without.
sion
s very efficient to greatly reduce the error in BP estimates in clinical imaging of dopamine transporter.
