Introduction: Semen analysis including sperm count, progressive and non-progressive motility, and normal morphology of spermatozoa of ejaculates from infertile men are important. In general, assisted reproductive techniques (ART) are chosen according to the semen parameters. Therefore, it is crucial to evaluate semen parameters with application of one quick, standard, and inexpensive methodology. In some ART laboratories in Iran, the aforementioned analysis is done using traditional methodology such as wet preparation (microscopic slide technique) which can mislead the infertile couple. As a result, the infertile couple may not fully benefit from the treatment outcome. The objective of this prospective study was to compare the two techniques of Wet preparation and Makler -- staining for analysis of semen parameters.
Materials & Methods: The three parameters of count, morphology and motility of spermatozoa along with round cells of ejaculates from 50 men attending the infertility treatment program were evaluated. Following macroscopic evaluation, each seminal sample was evaluated with two different techniques of Wet and Makler - staining in a blind setting. For wet slide, semen parameters as well as round cells were studied. However, for Makler technique, Makler chamber was used for evaluation of percentage of motility and sperm count. In addition, Geimsa (WHO) staining was applied for evaluation of sperm morphology and round cells. The results showed that the volume, PH and viscosity of semen were within normal range of WHO.
Results: The difference in the mean sperm count & percentage of motility was statistically insignificant. However, the sperm morpology was significantly different in the aformentioned groups (P=0.001). Also, the mean number of round cells in both groups was different (P=0.002). A total of one and nine seminal specimens were clear from round cells in Wet and Makler groups, respectively. The results showed that most variation was related to sperm morphology. For example, 5 seminal samples were abnormal in the wet method, while 32 ejaculates were abnormal in the Makler group.
Conclusion: Sperm morphology •and round cells should be evaluated with more attention. Sperm morphology plays an important role in ART methodology and therefore should be counted and detected in full. It should be noted that Wet preparation technique may be used for evaluation of concentration and motility if Makler chamber is unavailable at ART laboratories.
