The principle of customer orientation and customer satisfaction in the modern theories of management is considered as one of the main orientations (approaches) of the modern organizations. The general goal of conducting this study is to compare the key factors of success for the customer relation management (CRM) in the National Academy of Olympics and Paralympics from officers', managers' and experts' point of view.. Method of in this research is descriptive and surveying due to the applied objective and in order to gather data the field study was used. The statistical population of this study consists of managers (managers of academy central offices and federation heads) 57 people, experts (specialized board members of the academy) 30 people and the officers (officers of national academy of Olympics and Paralympics) 40 people. In this study, (CRM) questionnaire was used. Validity of the questionnaire was evaluated under the supervision of experts. It was tailored with regard to the academy atmosphere. Its reliability was tested to be 0.89 by α Chronbach test. And for analyzing the data inferential descriptive statistical techniques and SPSS software were used. Smearnoy Calmograph test was applied to analyze the natural position of data and the Kruskal Wallis test were used for comparing the attitudes and viewpoints.Concerning the culture and process key factors among the officers, managers and experts' view points, findings show that there is a significant difference. Thus, the null hypothesis is rejected. Regarding the key factors of customer strategy, customer interaction strategy, organization title strategy, value creation strategy, individuals, organizational structure, information technology and knowledge and learning management, there is no significant difference among the attitudes of these three groups. Therefore, the null hypothesis is confirmed. In this study, in order to identify the key factors of success of the customer relation management, the model presented by Adam Lindgreen et. al. (2007) was used as a theoretical model. Examining the officers, experts and managers' viewpoints indicated that with regard to the findings these factors affected the success of Academy of Olympics and Paralympics  in presenting services to the customers and attempt has been made through comparing the viewpoints of these three groups in the Academy of Olympics and Paralympics with respect of key factors of success of customer relation management by identifying the factors which affects the procedure of implementing customer relation management highly and contributes the academy in making a more effective relationship with customers.
