In many circumstances, texture is the only
information that can be used in natural image analysis
because it is an important property of the surface that
characterizes it’s nature. Texture is defined as a spatial
arrangement of local (gray level) intensity attributes which
are correlated within areas of visual scene corresponding to
surface regions. An image region has a constant texture if
sets of its local properties in that region are constant. Thus
texture analysis has received considerable attention in the
field of image analysis and pattern recognition. Texture
exhibits some sort of periodicity of the basic pattern of
Spongy Tissue in alphonso mango. This leads to use textural
property to identify different patterns of Spongy Tissue in
alphonso for detection of defects in alphonso mango. Visual
assessment of texture made by human is time consuming and
inspection made by human does not achieve a high degree of
accuracy and preciseness. Automated visual inspection of the
textural pattern improves the accuracy and preciseness
during detection of defects in alphonso mango. In the
literature, the researchers worldwide have been working in
various texture analysis algorithms for different applications
like detection, recognition, classification, segmentation,
clustering etc. Many algorithms suffer from low sensitive
detection, difficult back ground adaption and high memory
requirement. Problems and limitations associated with the
available techniques have been reported by many studies.
Each has some drawback under all lighting conditions and no
one has used a robust, reliable algorithm for detection of
spongy tissue in alphonso mango under real life test
environment. To develop an optimized algorithm using a non
contact mechanism which will detect the defective alphonso
mangoes happen to be a challenging task. The objective of
the proposed research work is to develop a database using
non-contact imaging technique like digital X-ray and to
obtain computationally cost effective and noncontact solution
that achieve better recognition rate under various conditions
in consultation with the agriculture scientist. In this paper we
have proposed use of Gabor wavelets for extraction of
textural features that identifies Spongy Tissue in alphonso
mango successfully. Performance of the proposed algorithm
is carried out on the generated database [1] that is easily
available for the researchers working on the said area.
Experimental results computed using the proposed algorithm
and manual validation process with the cut sections of the
alphonso mangoes show that identification rate of defective
mangoes for the said database was found to be 93.6%.
