Objective: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), one of the most common and aggressive
malignant brain tumors, is highly resistant to radiotherapy. Numerous approaches have
been pursued to find new radiosensitizers. We used a picogreen and colonogenic assay
to appraise the DNA damage and cell death in a spheroid culture of GBM cells caused by
iodine-131 (I-131) beta radiation in the presence of topotecan (TPT).
Materials and Methods: U87MG cells were cultured as spheroids with approximate
diameters of 300 ?m. Cells were treated with beta radiation of I-131 (at a dose of 2 Gy)
and/ or TPT (1 ?g/ml for 2 hours). The numbers of cells that survived were compared with
untreated cells using a colonogenic assay. In addition, we evaluated possible DNA damages
by the picogreen method. The relation between DNA damage and cell death was
assessed in the experimental study of groups.
Results: The findings showed that survival fraction (SF) in the I-131+TPT group
(39%) was considerably less than the I-131 group (58.92%; p < 0.05). The number of
single strand breaks (SSB) and double strand breaks (DSB), in the DNA of U87MG
cells treated with beta radiation of I-131 and TPT (I-131+TPT) significantly increased
compared to cells treated with only I-131 or TPT (p < 0.05). The amount of SSB repair
was more than DSB repair (p < 0.05). The relationship between cell death and
DNA damage was close (r?0.6) and significant (p < 0.05) in the irradiated and treated
groups. Also the maximum rate of DNA repair occurred 24 hours after the treatments.
A significant difference was not observed on other days of the restoration.
Conclusion: The findings in the present study indicated that TPT can sensitize
U87MG cells to radiation and increase DNA damages. Potentially, TPT can cause
an increase in damage from DSB and SSB by its inhibitory effects on topoisomerase
enzyme and the cell cycle. The increased complex damages following the use of a
genotoxic agent and beta I-131 radiation, causes a significant increase the cell death
because of the difficult repair process. By assessing the relationship between DNA
damage and cell death, the picogreen method can be useful in predicting colonogenic
assay. Consequently, it is suggested that co-treatment with I-131 beta radiation and
TPT can improve GBM treatment.
