Objective: The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are a group of nuclear
receptor proteins whose functions as transcription factors regulate gene expressions.
PPARs play essential roles in the regulation of cellular differentiation, development,
and metabolism (carbohydrate, lipid, protein), and tumorigenesis of higher organisms.
This study attempts to determine the effect of baicalin, a PPAR? activator, on erythroid
differentiation of cluster of differentiation 133+ (CD133+) cord blood hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs).
Materials and Methods: In this experimental study, in order to investigate the effects of
the PPAR? agonists baicalin and troglitazone on erythropoiesis, we isolated CD133+ cells
from human umbilical cord blood using the MACS method. Isolated cells were cultured
in erythroid-inducing medium with or without various amounts of the two PPAR? activators
(baicalin and troglitazone). Erythroid differentiation of CD133+ cord blood HSCs were
assessed using microscopic morphology analysis, flow cytometric analysis of erythroid
surface markers transferrin receptor (TfR) and glycophorin A (GPA) and bycolony forming
assay.
Results: Microscopic and flow cytometric analysis revealed the erythroid differentiation of
CD133+ cord blood HSCs under applied erythroid inducing conditions. Our flow cytometric
data showed that the TfR and GPA positive cell population diminished significantly in the
presence of either troglitazone or baicalin. The suppression of erythroid differentiation
in response to PPAR? agonists was dose-dependent. Erythroid colony-forming ability of
HSC decreased significantly after treatment with both PPAR? agonists but troglitazone
had a markedly greater effect.
Conclusion: Our results have demonstrated that PPAR? agonists modulate erythroid differentiation
of CD133+ HSCs, and therefore play an important role in regulation of normal
erythropoiesis under physiologic conditions. Thus, considering the availability and application
of this herbal remedy for treatment of a wide range of diseases, the inhibitory effect of
baicalin on erythropoiesis should be noted.
