The existing studies show that the major problems of small industries among the cities of Iran exist in Tehran. These problems mostly are pertaining to small production and servicing units such as car servicing units, carpentry, blacksmithing, metal plating,etc. In one hand these activities are effective in job making, bring out of citizens demands and help to the development of the industries and economy of the country, on the other hand, location of them in the urban area may make some difficulties in condition disregarding of the site selection principles and pollution control methods. To remove or decrease such problems, it is absolutely necessary to carry out special measures and studies. In fact, the main objective of the present study was the above mentioned reason. To achieve this objective
, the data were collected based on library studies, interviewing relevant authorities and field visits (134 units in district 11 as the study zone were visited).
According to the obtained results in this studies, district II is placed at the 5th rank among other districts in view of pollutant and disturbant enterprises location. Among the different economic activities in this district, the activities of public. Social and personal services group has caused maximum annoyance and pollution by scoring annoyance index of 25.65%. The industrial activities group with index of 13.65% was at the second rank. Furthermore, noise pollution was the major problem caused by the enterprises located in the concerned district. It must be emphasized that annoyance resulted by these units were mostly related to their site conditions and also the management method of them rather than the kind of their activities.
Ultimately, the evaluation of structure and plans for control of pollutant and disturbant enterprises, indicated that the reduction of pollutant and annoyer enterprises, according to fundamental and numerous difficulties, factors, managerial difficulties and specifications of small production and servicing units and their administration, in spite of accomplished actions, had not obtained desired results. Therefore improvement and enhancement of annoyer and pollutant enterprises needs to implement reforming actions in different aspects such as suitable distribution of facilities, support of systemic view, improvement of organizational structure, increase of manpower and facilities in related organizations, completion of expert evaluation tools, development of controller tools.
