Background: Diabetes is considered as one of the health problems in all societies. Exercise training 
and drug interventions, especially herbal medicines, consider as approaches to improving diabetes. 
The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of 6 weeks of aerobic training and Pistacia 
atlantica extract consumption on pancreatic β-cells function in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. 
Methods: Thirty six male Wistar rats divided into five groups: normal control, diabetic control, 
diabetes+aerobic training, diabetes+extract, diabetes+aerobic training+extract. Diabetes was induced 
by intra-peritoneal injection of streptozotocin (40mg/kg). Exercise program was include 6 weeks of 
aerobic training on a treadmill (5 sessions per week, 40 minutes per session, with a speed of 20m/min 
and 5% incline). Extract groups were received Pistacia atlantica extract based on body weight, at the 
end of each training session. After 6 weeks of aerobic training and Pistacia atlantica extract 
consumption, plasma glucose and insulin levels were measured for determination of β-cells function 
(HOMA-B). Data were analyzed via ANOVA, with a significant level P<0.05.  
Results: HOMA-B index in diabetic control group was significantly higher than normal control group 
(P=0.0001). Also mean of HOMA-B index in diabetes+extract and diabetes+exercise training+extract 
groups was significantly lower than diabetic control group (P values 0.003, 0.001 respectively) and 
between mean of HOMA-B index in diabetic control group with diabetes+aerobic training group were 
observed no significant differences (P=0.052). 
Conclusion: The results of this study showed that Pistacia atlantica extract consumption, alone and 
along with aerobic training leads to significant improvement in pancreatic β-cells function in diabetic 
rats. Also extract consumption along with aerobic training in comparison to training alone has had 
greater impact on the improvement of pancreatic β-cells function. It seems that aerobic training along 
with the use of specific herbal plants can be considered as a complementary therapy in improvement 
of diabetics. 
