Paper industry generates a considerable amount of wastes. Their composition mainly depends on the type of paper produced and the origin of cellulose fibres. Nowadays, in Spain, 40% of solid wastes generated by the paper and pulp industry are deposited directly in landfill, 25% are used in the agriculture, 13% in the ceramic industry and 7% in the concrete production. In the last years, thermal treatment methods like combustion, pyrolysis and gasification have been widely study as alternative techniques for the valorization of different organic waste materials. The main objective of the present work is to study the pyrolysis behaviour of different paper mill waste materials. For this reason, a wide characterization of eight paper mill waste materials from different origins was performed using SEM, FTIR, DRX and thermogravimetric techniques. Paper mill sludges from recycled paper, mainly wastes obtained from deinking process, showed high CaCO3 and clays contents. Compared with the elevated total organic matter content (TOM) of paper mill waste materials their low organic carbon content determined by Cr2O72− oxidation reveals the elevated chemical stability of organic matter, due to high content on cellulose fibres. Analysis of samples by SEM indicates that successive recycled processes of paper leads to paper mill waste materials with more degraded fibres. XRD analyses show as crystalline cellulose was present in reject and primary sludge from paper mills that produced paper from virgin wood. However, crystalline cellulose content significantly decreased in waste materials from recycled paper. Finally, thermogravimetric analysis indicates that presence or mineral matter and degradation of cellulose significantly influences their pyrolysis behaviour. In general, weight loss of paper mill waste materials started at lower temperatures than pure cellulose. In waste materials from recycled paper weight loss continues at temperatures highest than 500 °C due to kaolinite dehydration and carbonates decomposition.
