Background and Aim: Due to widespread use of saffron (Crocus sativus L) as food
colorant and flavor, and its reputation in folk medicine as a drug, recent studies
revealed that main components of saffron are the carotenoids: crocin, crocetin,
picrocrocin and safranal which have a large number of physiological effects on
different biological systems. Our objective was to assess the efficacy of Crocus
sativus on serum proteins pattern in the male mice.
Material and Methods: Five groups including eight adult male Balb/C mice were
used in this study. Normal saline administered as placebo to control group and saffron
extract in doses of 25 mg/Kg/48hr, 50 mglKg/48hr, 100 mg/Kg/48hr and 200
mglKg/48hr were injected intra peritoneally for 20 days to experimental groups. The
levels of Albumin, Alpha-I, Alpha-2, Beta and Gamma globulins were separated
electrophoretically and NG ratio was calculated from the pattern of
electrophoretogram.
Results: The result indicated that the levels of Albumin increased significantly in two
experimental groups that had received 50 mg/Kg/48h and 100 mglKg/48h extract of
Saffron as compared to the control group, the levels of Alpha-l didn't have any
remarkable changes in any group. The injection of 50 mg/Kg/48h, 100 mg/Kg/48h
and 200 mg/Kg/48hr extract of saffron decreased (p<0.05) the Alpha-2 level in
plasma as compared to the control group and levels of Beta globulins increased
significantly in these three groups. The levels of Gamma globulins increased
significantly in 100 and 200 mg/kg-treated groups as compared to the placebo
controlled group. NG ratio (Albumin/Globulin ratio) were significantly (p<0.05)
lower than control group in any groups that received saffron extract in a dosedependent
manner.
Conclusion: Albumin were significantly increased in two groups and NG ratio was
decreased in any groups. This can be interpreted that in the absence of antigen
stimulation, serum globulins did alter markedly by extract of saffron. The study shows
that since albumin synthesis occurs in the liver cells, thus administration of saffron
may improve the status ofliver function significantly.

