The ecosystem-management model FORECAST was used to compare some ecological impacts of natural disturbance (wildfire) and timber harvesting. The scientific objective of the study was to assess whether or not two types of timber harvesting at various rotation lengths would have biogeochemical and biomass implications that are within the natural range of variation caused by wildfire. The practical objective was to identify management strategies that would sustain or improve long-term site productivity in lodgepole pine forests in the central interior of British Columbia. We defined three fire severity categories (low, medium and high), three fire return intervals (40, 80 and 120 years), two utilization levels (including stem-only harvesting [SOH] and whole-tree harvesting [WTH]), and three timber production rotation lengths (40, 80 and 120 years). Differences in simulated productivity, decomposing litter mass, total available soil nitrogen and nitrogen removals were compared for all 15 combinations of the five levels of disturbance at the three frequencies. The simulated nutritional impacts of timber harvesting were within the simulated range of impacts caused by the wildfire defined in this study. They were similar to the simulated long-interval, low-severity wildfire regimes. Simulations suggest that ecological rotation lengths for long-term site productivity for lodgepole pine forests in the study area would be 80–120 years. These rotation lengths are close to the average wildfire return intervals (100–125 years) in the study area, supporting the idea that the present harvesting strategies should sustain tree growth at this frequency of harvest and severity of harvesting impacts. Both WTH and SOH are acceptable harvesting methods for the maintenance of long-term site productivity in these lodgepole pine forests if harvest intervals are 80 years or longer. However, SOH is a more nutrient conservative harvest method, and should be used instead of WTH for rotations less than 80 years. The importance of initial site quality in assessing sustainable long-term site productivity by modeling is demonstrated.
