Objective
tudy evaluated the effect of 2% chlorhexidine-containing acid (Ac/CHX) and 2% chlorhexidine digluconate solution (CHX) on immediate (IM) and 2-year (2Y) resin–dentin bond strength (BS) and silver nitrate uptake (SNU) for two simplified etch-and-rinse adhesives.
s
two caries-free extracted molars had a flat dentin surface exposed. In the control groups (groups 1), the surfaces were acid etched with conventional phosphoric acid and the adhesives Prime&amp;Bond NT (PB) or Adper Single Bond 2 (SB) was applied after rinsing, drying and rewetting with water. In groups 2, Ac/CHX groups the adhesives were applied in a similar manner; however a 2% CHX-containing acid was previously applied. In groups 3, the adhesives were applied according to the control group; however the rewetting procedure was performed with an aqueous solution of 2% CHX for 60 s. Composite build-ups were constructed incrementally and microtensile specimens (0.8 mm2) were prepared for microtensile bond strength testing in the IM or 2Y periods at 0.5 mm/min. For SNU, 2 bonded sticks from each tooth were coated with nail varnish, placed in the silver nitrate, polished down with SiC papers and analysed by EDX-SEM. The data from each adhesive was submitted to a two-way repeated measures ANOVA and Tukey's test (α = 0.05).
s
2Y, significant reductions of BS were observed for both adhesives in the control group (p &lt; 0.05). In Ac/CHX or CHX groups the BS remained stable for both systems. SNU was more evident in the control than in the experimental groups (p &lt; 0.05) both in IM and 2Y periods. The use of CHX in an aqueous solution or associated with the acid conditioner was effective to reduce the degradation of dentin bonds over a 2-year period.
icance
dition of CHX digluconate in the acidic conditioner may be an excellent tool to increase the long-term stability of collagens fibrils within the hybrid layer against host-derived metalloproteinases without the need for additional steps for the bonding protocol.
