Spatially explicit simulation models of varying degree of complexity are increasingly used in landscape and species management and conservation. The choice as to which type of model to employ in a particular situation, is however, far too often governed by logistic constraints and the personal preferences of the modeller, rather than by a critical evaluation of model performance. We present a comparison of three common spatial simulation approaches (patch-based incidence-function model (IFM), individual-based movement model (IBMM), individual-based population model including detailed behaviour and demographics (IBPM)). The IBPM was analysed in two versions (IBPM_st and IBPM_dyn). Both assumed spatial heterogeneity of the matrix, but the IBPM_dyn in addition included temporal matrix dynamics. The models were developed with a shared minimum objective, namely to predict dynamics of individuals or populations in space given a specific configuration of habitat patches. We evaluated how the choice of model influenced predictions regarding the effect of patch and corridor configuration on dispersal probabilities and the number of successful immigrants of a simulated small mammal. Model results were analysed both at the level of the entire habitat network and at the level of individual patches.

dels produced similar rankings of alternative habitat networks, but large discrepancies existed between absolute estimates of dispersal probabilities and the number of successful immigrants predicted by the different models. Generally, predicted dispersal probabilities were highest in the IBMM, intermediate in the IFM and the IBPM_st and lowest in the IBPM_dyn. Observed differences were due both to differences in implementation (e.g. raster versus vector-based movement algorithms), the chosen level of detail in landscape representation (e.g. matrix complexity) and the degree of behavioural realism included in the models (e.g. demography, differentiated mortality).

vantages and disadvantages of the three modelling approaches are discussed, as are the implications of the results for the recommended use of the three types of models in practical management.
