AbstractObjectives
ms of this pilot study were to investigate the prevalence of xerostomia and hyposalivation and their impact on quality of life in a cohort of elderly patients including dental status and the character of potential prosthetic restorations as independent variables.
s
ts aged 60 years or older without any objective or subjective need for prosthodontic treatment taking part in a regular recall programme were included in the trial. Quality of life was assessed using the German version of the GOHAI; prevalence and severity of xerostomia was investigated using the shortened version of the Xerostomia Inventory (XI). Stimulated salivary flow rate was determined using a sialometric approach. Dental status and the character of prosthetic restorations (no/fixed restorations and removable but tooth-supported dentures vs. gum-supported dentures) were assessed in a clinical examination by experienced dentists specialized in prosthodontic treatment.
s
l of 68 patients were included in the trial; a prevalence of xerostomia of 16% and a prevalence of hyposalivation of 31% were identified. The quality of life in the study cohort decreased significantly as a function of xerostomia severity but not salivary flow; moreover, a significant impact of the number of teeth/implants in the upper jaw and the presence of gum-supported dentures in both jaws on GOHAI scores could be identified.
sions
 the limitations of a pilot study, the results support the assumption that the quality of life in elderly patients is particularly related to their subjective perception of xerostomia. A decline in salivary flow, the dental status and the character of prosthetic restorations appear to play a subordinate role for the quality of life in elderly patients.
al significance
ality of life in elderly patients may be severely diminished due to an increased subjective perception of dry mouth. Dental treatment should focus on alleviating xerostomia, whereas the impact of dental status and prosthetic restoration appear to be subordinate.
