Introduction & Objective: Comparative reductase inhibitors, such as simvastatin increase HDLcholestrol
and decrease serum triglyceride and cholesterol. It is widely recognized that statins
have organ protective nature and most effective for organ damage progressing. Obstructive
uropathy can be used to indicate any obstruction to urinary flow; which causes a developing
of hydronephrosis, tubular atrophy and associated renal impairment. The aim of this study
was evaluation of the simvastatin effect on renal fibrosis after unilateral ureteral obstruction in
rat.
Materials & Methods: In this experimental study, 50 adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were
subjected to unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) and randomly divided into five groups (ten
rats in each group) as follows: (I) control group; (2) UUO; (3) UUO/SIM; (4) Sham-operated;
(5) Sham/SIM. Control animals received orally drug solvent by gavage for 15 days (started
one day before operation). Unilateral ureteral obstruction was performed in groups 2 and 3
and sham operations were performed in groups 4 and 5. In group 2 animals received drug
solvent and in group 3 animals received simvastatin (2 mg/kg/twice daily) for 15 days (started
one day before operation). Rats were sacrificed either at day 14 for histopathological
evaluation with H&E, masson-trichrome and PAS technique.
Results: In this investigation histopathologic evaluation approved that in UUO group, renal
interstitial fibrosis, tubular epithelial necrosis, hemorrhage, interstitial infiltration of
mononuclear cells, tubular atrophy, glumerular tufts expanding, periglomerular sclerosis,
subcapsular fibrosis, glomerulosclerosis and peritubular capillaries edema were observed. But
in simvastatin treated animals this histopatologic lesions and fibrosis significantly (p<0.05)
decreased. There was no difference between control and sham groups.
Conclusion: In this investigation our results showed that ureteral obstruction increased renal
fibrosis and caused sever deterioration in renal tissue but simvastatin administration improved
renal fibrosis. It needs to be more investigation for approving of organ protective action of
simvastatin in human renal disorders.
