Introduction & Objective: Spinal anesthesia offers many advantages for cesarean section
delivery. But one of its disadvantages is higher incidence of hypotension. Comparison of
preemptive intramuscular and intravenous ephedrine for reduction of spinal anesthesia
induced hypotension during cesarean section was the aim of this study.
Materials & Methods: This study was a randomized double blind clinical trial. 76 women
candidate for elective cesarean section & A.S.A (class I,II) after obtaining an informed
patients consent were randomly divided in four groups. Group IMso: 10 minutes before spinal
anesthesia, 50 mg ephedrine 1M and immediately after spinal anesthesia 2 ml N/S Iv were
injected. Group IV20: 10 minutes before spinal anesthesia, Iml N/S 1M and immediately after
spinal anesthesia 20 mg ephedrine IV were injected. Group IV10: 10 minutes before spinal
anesthesia, Iml N/S 1M and immediately after spinal anesthesia 10 mg ephedrine IV were
injected. Group P: 10 minutes before spinal anesthesia, Iml N/S 1M and immediately after
spinal anesthesia 2 ml N/S IV were injected (Placebo). In all patients blood pressure and heart
rate were measured by Reishter manometer and pulse oximetry device (oxypleth 520 A). after
infusion of 500 ml ringer IV, spinal anesthesia was performed in sitting position, using
needle number 25 gauge, at L,-L4 or L4-Ls level with 1.5 ml hyperbaric lidocaine 5%. Blood
pressure and pulse rate were measured every minute for five minutes, also every 5 minutes
and after 20 minutes every 10 minutes. Hypotension was defined as decreased blood pressure
greather than 25% of baseline blood pressure or systolic blood pressure lower than 90 mmHg
, which was treated with 10 mg IV ephedrine. Time and dose of therapeutic ephedrine was
recorded.
Results: By considering age and baseline blood pressure and heart rate, all patients were
similar. Mean systolic blood pressure (SBP) and mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) in IV20
group were higher than placebo group (P<0.05). Incidence of hypotension and mean dose of
rescue ephedrine were also significantly lower in IMso and IV20 groups.
Conclusion: Prophylactic ephedrine 20 mg IV or 50 mg 1M, were effective in preventing
hypotension during cesarean section under spinal anesthesia.
