Introduction
The human being is only the creature that fulfills inherent essence by
system of education. Socialization is a main goa] of education. Socialization
is accomplished through various institutions. The main institutions of
socialization consist of: family, school, peer group. mass media, ideology
and government. School is an important institution for socializing of
children. Socilizing of children in schools is accomplished through friends,
peer groups, teacher and textbooks. The elementary textbooks play an
important role in implementing socialization processes. Socialization
features (values, norms, roles, etc.) in textbooks are demonstrated through
distinct mechanisms. The contexts of elementary that text book that usually
consists of socialization features influence the students' thoughts and
behaviors. It is important to determine and clarify how these materials
influence the students.
Critical discourse analysis (CDAl is an area of scholarship. CDA
intends to reveal the interaction between language, power and ideology
inherent in language: therefore CDA discovers discursive features capable
of exerting power and telling ideology through them.
Research Questions
I. What are explicit socialization features III Farsi textbooks of
elementary school?
2. What are hidden socialization features In Farsi textbooks of
elementary schools?

3. What are omitted socialization features in Farsi textbooks of
elementary schools?
4. Are there differences between Farsi textbooks of elementary school
from the point of view of discursive features for socializing of children?
Method
A mixed design method (qualitative and quantitative) has been used to
conduct this research. This research has many characteristics of quantitative
paradigm like using of numbers and objective perspective and a
characteristic of qualitative paradigm like discovery. In text analysis
researchers encountered datum that did not include either of previous
definite categories. According to many witnesses, a new category entitled
"environmental values" was added to existing categories. Sampling was
purposive and coordinated with research goals.
Population were all of Farsi textbooks of elementary school in 20052006.
In this study the Farsi textbooks (grade I, 3, 5) used in Iranian
elementary schools have been analyzed using Van Leeuwen's (1996)
modified model of discursive and socialization features.
This research was conducted in the following stages:
1. All of texts of Farsi textbooks (reading book) grade I, 3, 5 of
elementary school were examined.
2. According to discursive features of Van Leeuwen's model, discursive
statements became distinct.
3. Discursive features were extracted.
4. Then values, norms and roles of social actors represented in texts like
stories, poems and photos were determined. These features may been in one
statement or in one paragraph or in one lesson explicitly or implicitly.
5. The Chi-square (X") procedure was used to measure the possible
statistical differences between the socialization and discursive features.
6. Then results was interpreted.
7. Inter-rater reliability and Intra-rater reliability were calculated for
more confidence of results. Correlation coefficient in inter rater reliability
was .87, P= .01 and in intera-rater reliability was .85, P=.OI
Results
In answer to question one:
1. Religious values in each book had the most frequency. In Farsi grade
l , environmental and political values had the second rank and the third rank.
Individual theoretical and familial values with the same frequency, had the
fourth rank and, economical, art, social, national values came as the last
rank. In Farsi grade 3. theoretical and individual values had the second rank

and environmental, social, political, art, national, economical and familial
had the next ranks. In Farsi grade 5, individual values had the second rank
and social and political values the third rank and theoretical, art, national,
economical, familial and environmental values followed. Norms had less
frequency than values. Social manners, social morals, social laws and
regulations had the highest frequency in textbooks. Traditional gender roles
had the highest frequency.
In answer to question two:
2. Religious values, political values and traditional roles were mostly
hidden in textbooks. Most women were housewives. They did house work.
Sons played with cars and daughters played with dolls.
In answer to question three:
3. Globalization values, folklore, social ceremonies and new roles
(except one discourse) were totally omitted.
In answer to question four:
4. There were differences between quantity and kind of discursive
features in Farsi textbooks. Frequency of hidden inclusion, abstraction.
genericization and overdetermination were less than explicit inclusion,
objectivation, specification and single determination.
Conclusion
Religious values had the first rank and political values had the next
rank. These findings corresponded with internal and external researches that
power and ideology are coded in language. Elementary period is the most
important period of education for children. Children in this period will learn
obedience from masters of power and governmental and social laws.
Men are represented more than women and traditional roles were been
more than new roles. These findings correspond with internal and external
researches. In textbooks. women are always reinforced with emotional and
passive roles. Women are sometimes limited with their home and their
family but men are concerned with power, politics and wealth. Frequencies
of hidden inclusions were less than explicit inclusions. Authors of Farsi
textbooks didn't try to hide ideology; on the contrary their goal was showing
that ideology.
Globalization values and folklore are omitted from discourses of
elementary textbooks; country of Iran is formed from different tribes. It is
necessary to know different cultures of Iran and students should become
familiar with Iran tribes and globalization values in textbooks.
