Huge global structural changes especially the emerging
information and communication technology (ICT) and knowledge economy have increased the importance of
the quality debate in the Scientific System. However, there is no any comprehensive system for evaluating of
the quality of "knowledge prodution system" established in Iran. This requires the consensus of scholars and policy
makers. and should be based on international scientific and academic principles and norms, while being relevant
to the national context. Anderson, Billing, Busters, Maassen. Tomusk, Vander Wende, Kouwcnaar,
Vlasceanu, Bazargan and many other researchers at the national and international levels have studied the components
of the Scientific and Higher Education Evaluatiou Systems. By employing a historical, comparative and
qualitative research method, this article has developed an appropriate model for higher education accreditation system
(including internal and external evaluation) bused Oil a nonagon model. The historical study shows that qual ity
in Iran's higher education has always been faced with certain structural and ideo-political obstacles in the fonn of
a huge governmental bureaucracy, a petro-political economy and weak institutions, so that rational and liberal islion
activities were often feeble and vulnerable, generally encountering difficult structural challenges as unfinished
projects. Using a problem/solution model of categorizing the main challenges of Scientific Evaluation System in Iran, this article proposes nine essential steps for encountering with the afore mentioned challenges and
establishing a comprehensive system for the evaluation of the quality in higher education. This includes the four levels
of l.university information system~2. university evaluation system, 3. external evaluation and accreditation,
and 4. monitoring the national scientific system. The desired objective of evaluation and quality improvement
will be only obtained through government playing a supportive and facilitative role in developing the required
infrastructures for national monitoring of the scientific system; emphasizing internal initiatives of the universities
and the scientific institutions themselves in a competitive sphere at both national and international lcvclc. 
