Human-mediated and natural disturbances such as nutrient enrichment, habitat modification, and flood events often result in significant shifts in species composition and abundance that translate into changes in the food web structure. Six mass-balanced models were developed using the “Ecopath with Ecosim” software package to assess changes in benthic food web properties in the Mondego estuarine ecosystem (Portugal). Field, laboratory and literature information were used to construct the models. The main study objective was to assess at 2 sites (a Zostera meadow and a bare sediment area) the effects of: (1) a period of anthropogenic enrichment, which led to excessive production of organic matter in the form of algal blooms (1993/1994); (2) the implementation of mitigation measures, following a long period of eutrophication (1999/2000); and (3) a centenary flood (winter 2000/2001). Different numbers of compartments were identified at each site and in each time period. In general, the Zostera site, due to its complex community, showed a higher number of compartments and a higher level of system activity (i.e. sum of consumptions, respiration, flow to detritus, production, total system throughput, net primary production and system omnivory index). The differences at the two sites in the three time periods in the breakdown of throughput were mainly due to differences in the biomass of the primary producers (higher primary production at the Zostera site). Consumption, respiration and flow to detritus were dominated by the grazers Hydrobia ulvae and Scrobicularia plana at the Zostera and bare sediment sites respectively. At both sites, after recovery measures were implemented there was an increase in S. plana and Hediste diversicolor biomass, consumption, respiration and flows to detritus, and a decrease in H. ulvae biomass and associated flows, which increased again after the flood event. The mass-balanced models showed that the trophic structure of the benthic communities in Mondego estuary was affected differently by each disturbance event. Interestingly, in our study a high system throughput seems to be associated with higher stress levels, which contradicts the idea that higher system activity is always a sign of healthier conditions.
