Studying the Impact of Organizational Culture Dimensions on Job
Satisfaction of Firefighting Staff for Tehran’s District 4
Mahdi Mousavi Kia, MA Student of Research in Social Sciences, Islamic Azad
University, Roudehen branch, Iran
Email: m.mousavi125@yahoo.com
Received: July 31, 2013 Accepted: April 9, 2014
Abstract
Introduction: Just as human beings cannot live without culture, organizations are
meaningless without a comprehensive and compiled culture. In fact, culture is the
spirit of the organization. Organization survives on the condition of having a strong
and exhaustive organizational culture. Therefore, this research aims to study the
impact of organizational culture components on job satisfaction among firefighting
staff for Tehran’s district 4.
Methods: In this applied research, as concerning research objective, and correlationdescriptive
as concerns method of gathering data. All employees working for Tehran
firefighting organization district 4 were studied in 2012. About 200 employees were
selected as a sample group using Cochran formula based on stratified random
sampling. Face validity and content reliability were confirmed in a reasonable level.
Hypotheses were tested using one-sample t-test and route analysis.
Findings: According to the results, the dominant culture in an organization is above
average. Job satisfaction was gained average score in promotion aspect and low
average in salary and benefits. In addition, the correlation coefficient between
organizational culture components (change management, goals’ alignment, attention
to clients, coordination in working teams, power coordination) and job satisfaction
was r=0.629, r=0.565, r=0.430, r=0.487, r=0568 respectively. Thus, the maximum
impact is associated with the impact of change management on job satisfaction, and
the minimum impact is related to the impact of clients’ attention on job satisfaction.
Conclusion: Since a direct and positive relationship was observed between
independent and dependent variables; and independent variables were effective on job
satisfaction. Employees will give great job satisfaction if more attention be paid to
the components of organizational culture. Hence, it is necessary for managers of
organizations to assure that individuals have these characteristics before assigning
them to organizational positions through participation in educational workshops and
on the job training courses. However, they may take appropriate measures in order to
improve employees’ job satisfaction.
Keywords: organizational culture, job satisfaction, Tehran firefighting organization
