Introduction
Iranian researchers of educational matters have rarely been cuncerned
with the relationship between educational philosophy which has on impact
on educational system of Iran and evaluation methods. Nevertheless, the
definision and conceptualizatiun of evaluation and its proper methods, an:
an important division of "curriculum". In fact, evaluation and it>. methods
are affected by philosophical foundations. Su. before studying and
researching on the topic of evaluation and its relation witl, "Creativity"
'Thinking styles" and so on, the first step is tu clarify and explain the
meaning of education and also, the meaning of student (humanologieaJ
foundations).
Therefore, the main purpose of this study is to explain the relationship
between philosophical foundations of educatiunal system of Iran and current
methods of evaluation in this system.
Research Question
Related to the purpose of this study, it's main question is: Is there any
logical and harrnonical relationship between educational philosophy's
impact on Iranian educational system and evaluative methods of students'
learning (examsf'
15
Method
In order to respond to this question, at first, the quality of relationship
between philosophical foundations and evaluative methods of students'
learning must be explained. In other words, the first step is to clarify the
philosophical suppositions which are the bases of Iranian educational
system. To achieve this two ways can be used. First, starting with
philosophical foundations to explain the main suppositions of different
educational philosophies; after that, to clarify the meaning of education
based on those suppositions. Second is vice versa. that is, at first, to explain
the current kinds of exams in Iranian educational system. By recognizing
them, we can understand the hidden meaning of evaluation in practice. In
other words, current kinds of exams infer implicit meaning of evaluation.
Then, based on this step, the hidden meaning of terms such as curriculum.
teaching-learning process, methods of teaching, teacher and student will be
clarified. At last, based on discovered meaning. hidden philosophical
suppositions can be revealed.
Results
According to current methods of exams which have been used in
schools we can deduct that the hidden meaning of evaluation of students'
learning in Iran is "to specify the quantity of stored knowledge of students'
mind in comparison to given standards". This definision, reveals the
characteristics of curriculum in Iranian formal educational system. These
characteristics include special and previous aims which are the bases or
curriculum. Besides, The most important and main component of
curriculum in Iran is textbooks. In other words, Iranian schools' curriculum
is textbook oriented.
Thus the teaching-learning process in practice is only limited to transfer
the knowledge and information from teacher to students. ln other words.
learning means to cultivate the memory. Therefore, based on the above
hidden concepts, the meaning of education will be summarized to cumulate
and store knowledge in mind, that is something which can be measured by
objective tests.
16
Conclusion
This analytical study shows that Iranian f0I111al educational system in
practice tends to behaviourism, In other words, thc basic curriculum's
elements which impact on Iranian educational system are derived from
behabiouristic approach, Nevertheless, the advanced aims of education are
derived from Islamic education, If we review the formal educational aims
which have been approved hy "Council of fundamental change in
educational system", we will understand the clear conflict between aims and
education in programs, It is completely clear that, this implicit conflict is
directed to great challenges and difficulties for education at all. In fact, in
such conditions not only the aims have not been accomplished, but also,
methods of evaluation failed. This paradoxical situation can be seen in
Iranian formal educational system and its components. Therefore, it seems
that in balance with Islamic education and its philosophical foundations,
Iranian educational system must substitute the qualitative evaluative
methods fur quantitative methods. Because, in accordance with Islamic
education, the major aim uf education is internal and qualitative change and
spiritual development. So, for evaluating this kind of development,
quantitative methods arc not suitable and sufficient.

