Objective: Plant ar fasciiti s is one of the mos t common foot
complications . Pain appear at the inside par t of the an terior
ma rgin of ca lcaneous bone. The goal of this study wa s a
comparative between the effect of med ia l heel wedge and lateral
forefoot wedge on improvement of Activity da ily living, Spo rt and
pain in these patients .
Materials & Methods: In this inter ventional and qua si experimen tal
study, 30 patien ts with plan tar fasci itis including 12 male and 18 fema le
with 36 invol ved extremi ties were se lected by non probab ility
sampling . Th e patients were allocated in two groups with 15 patients in
each group by random assig nment.
First group used medi al heel wedge and second group used lat eral
forefoot wedge . Variab ies includi ng ac ti vity dail y Iiving, sport and
recr eat ional ac tivity. step length were measured in 3 stages . In order to
evalua ting of the var iables FAGS quest io nnaire was used . 3 stages
included : once before interve ntion and the seco nd and third stages af ter 2
weeks and the third stage 4 weeks after intervention . Alp ha cronbach in all
subscales were more than 0/7 1 and test retest correlation in all subscales
were more than 0/80 . Data ana lysis has been do ne with T-Test, SmironovKolomogrov,
Alpha Cro nbac h and Correlat ion Coefficient.
Results: In bo th follow up stages, the change of variab les including
ac tiv ity daily living, spo rt and recreational activi ty and pain was significant
(p<O.OS). But there was no sig nifica n t difference betwee n two patient gro ups
in step length var iables in both follow up stages (p=0/S I8 for the first follow
up stage and p=0/S02 for the second follow up stage).
Conclusion: According to finding of this s tudy, medial hee l wedge was
more effec tive on improvement of acti vi ty daily living, sport and
recrea tional ac tiv ity and pain in bot h follow up stages than the later al
for efoot wedge. But med ial heel wedge wasn 't mor e effec tive on step
length increasing than lateral forefoot wedge
