Objective: The purpose of present research was the comparison
of moth er s irrational believes with severe or pro found mentally
handicapp ed child and mothers with normal child from 6 to 14
year s old in Tehran ci ty.
Materials & Methods: Th is study was an analyti cal , cross sectional
and comparative (case - control) research. From mothers
with severe or profound mentally handicapped child who had
refer ed to Tehran wel far e se rvices centers, 80 mothers we re
se lec ted by regul ar rand omi zed sampling from two rehabilitation
centers and 80 mothers with normal child wer e se lec ted for peering
with the group of testimonial from schools areas of east , west, south,
north and ce nter of Tehran, through mu Hi - stage clu ster sampling in
for variables of: age of moth er s. educational level s, the location of
living and the number of childre n. Th ey answ ered. to qu estionnaire of
irrational bel ieves ofj ons (lBT).
Anal ysi s of dat a was done by de scripti ve and infringing s ta tis tics
methods (Independent T test, U Mann Whitney, Chi-square and fisher ).
Results: Th e findin gs showed that : there are significantly differen ces in
total irrat ional belie ves and irration al beli eve s o f blam e proneness,
fru strati on reacti ve, anxiou s over co nc e rn , problem avoidin g and
dependency, pe rfectionism betw een two groups of mothers (P<0105).There
was no significant di fference in irr ation al believes between mothers who
had menta) handi cap dau ghter and mothers who had mental handi cap so n
(P=O/3 [4 ). There was no significa ntly di fferen ce between two groups o f
moth er s in four believes of demand for appro val (P=01737), high-sel f
ex pectation (P=OIl 26), emotional irresponsibility (P=01727), helplessness for
change (p=O/283).
Conclusion: Irrational beli eves and many its sub sc ales . In mothers of
sev ere or profound mental handicap children were more than mother s with
normal child. But beli e ves of demand for approval , high self expectation ,
emotion al irresp on sibility, helple ssness for chang e in mothers with
handicap child was not more than mother s with normal child. Also
sexuality of handicap child doesn't effect in mothe s irrational believes.
