Background and objective: Obese individuals are at high risk for developing endocrine and
metabolie dysfunctions. Among the endocrine derangements of obesity is hyperparathyroidism,
believed to promote weight gain in obese subjects. Therefore the aim of this cross sectional
study was to investigate serum Parathyroid Hormone concentration and its relationship with
body composition and nutritional status in obese and none obese women.
Materials and Methods: 86 healthy reproductive age women (17-50 years) with no history
of hepatic or renal disorders, Diabetes and Hypertension and no consumption of vitamin D and
calcium supplements were participated in the study. They were separated into two experimental
groups based on Body Mass Index: obese group with stage I and 2 obesity (BMI: 30-34.9 and
35-39.9 kg/m respectively) and none obese group with normal weight (BMI : 18.5-24.9
kg/m'). Body composition was analyzed by BIA (Bioelectrical Impedance Analyser) method.
Serum PTH and alkaline phosphatase was measured by Enzyme linked immunoassay technique
(ELISA) and Enzymatic method respectively. Serum Calcium and Phosphorous were measured
colorirnetrically. Dietary energy and nutrient intakes were analyzed by NUTRITIONIST III
Software.
Results: Body composition and anthropometric parameters were significantly different
between two groups (P<O.OO l) ;However, There was no significant difference between mean
daily energy and nutrient intakes. Obese women have Significantly higher serum PTH than non
obese women (P<0.05). Serum calcium, phosphorous and alkaline phosphatase were not
significantly different. We found a significant positive relationship between serum PTH and
BMI, kilograms of body fat, body fat percent and waist circumference and a significant
negative relationship between serum PTH with percent of fat tree mass and total body
watcnkgj tp<0.05).
Conclusion: Serum PTH in obese women is higher than none obese women; So it rs
necessary to follow serum PTH level in obese individuals.
