Introduction & Objective: Breast cancer is one ot the most
prevaient cancers among the women with annual growth ot 2
percent. It aHects grossly the patient's quality of life. Rehabilitation
can be so effective on physiopsychosocical health and finally
increases their quality of life recovery. This study was designed to
determine the effects of rehabilitation on quality of lite in women
after mastectomy.
Materials & Methods: In a clinical trial, 57 cancerous women who
underwent modified radical mastectomy, had finished
chemotherapy and radiotherapy and received hormone therapy
were selected and randomly placed in two case and control
groups. Control group was under medical care and the case group
in addition to medical care received rehabilitation (physiotherapy,
education, individual counseling) for 2 months. The quality of life.
with regard to breast cancer, was measured by EORTC QlQ-BR
23, before Intervention, 1 week and 3 months after rehabilitation in
both groups. Data analysis was done by chi square, fisher exact
test, t- and paired t-tests and repeated measurement test.
Results: There was a statistically significant decrease in body
image and future perspective and meaningful increase in sexual
enjoyment and arm symptom in case group compared to control
group before intervention, while no significant difference was seen
in other scales before intervention. One week after the
interference, differences of both group in two scales of sex function
and sex enjoyment were meaningful and the function of case group
was more undesirable then that of the control group Three months
after completing the process there was a meaningful decrease in
sex function and sex enjoyment in case group in comparison with
the control group but there was a significant recovery in the case
group in other performance scales. Systemic therapy side effects
were significantly decreased in case group 3 months after
intervention whereas the quality of life in control group decreased
or did not change significantly after 3 months.
Conclusion: Performing rehabilitation process including
education, individual counseling and physiotherapy can promote
the Q.Ol of patients with mastectomy; therefore rehabilitation can
be recommended as an effective care program.
