Introduction & Objective: Diabetes is regarded as a serious
condition lor both the individual and the society. One of the most
important mortality reasons in diabetic patients is atherosclerosis.
Many epidemiological studies have shown that the total homocysteine
concentration is a risk indicator for cardiovascular disease.
Malondialdehyde (MDA) also is a highly toxic by- product formed in
part by lipid oxidation derived free radicals. Many studies have shown
that its concentration increases considerably in diabetes mellitus.
Epidemiological data indicate that the consumption of omega-3
unsaturated latty acids (03FA) leads to a reduction in cardiovascular
disorders may protect against metabolic diseases. In recent years,
numerous researches on omega-3 fatty acids have been done but it
cannot be used as a confident additive. Sa in order to evaluate and
compare Ihe effects of w3 on malondialdehyde (as fat peroxidation
indicator) and homocysteine on diabetic type 2 patients, this research
was carried out in Tehran University.
Materials & Methods: A randomized double blind placebo controlled
clinical trial was conducted on 81 type 2 diabetic patients, 45--B5 years
old with diabetes lor at least 2 years. Diabetic patients were randomly
assigned to one of the case or control groups, each subject received 3
capsules per day of omega-3 or placebo for a period of 2 months.
10 ml blood was collected tram each subject at the beginning and al
Ihe end 01 a 2-month trial. Serum MDA was delermined with
Tlobarbtturic acid for more sensinvity and hornosystein was measured
by Hitachi autoanalyzer with Enzymatic Cycling method. Nutrients
intakes were estimated using 24 h dietary recall questionnaire at the
beginning and at Ihe end at the 2-month trial lor 2 days and analyzed
by FPn. T-test also was used to compare groups.
Results: Copmaring the mean±S.D 01 BMI and load intake in both
groups showed no significanl differences. MDA level degreased 0.72
nmollml in case group but the difference with the control group was
not significant but the differences of homosystein level in case
(3.1O~mol/llt) and control (O.126~mol!lit) groups were significant
Conclusion: Consumption at omega-3 fatty acids supplementation (3
griper day) in capsul form can decrease the serum level of
homocysteine in diabetic patients without inducing any changes in
MDA level and lipid peroxidation.
