Background and Objective: In the present study, the effect of electromagnetic field on
ultrastructure of uterine tube epithelium and also the effect of hMG injection after exposure to
electromagnetic field is investigated
Materials and Method: Thity adult female wistar rats were divided into two groups of
control and experimental. The rats in experimental group were exposed to 3 mT
electromagnetic field 4hours per day for 4 months. The rats in control group were kept in
similar condition without exposure to electromagnetic field. After the experimental period, half
of the rats in both experimental and control groups were received a single dose of hMG.
Seventy two hours after the injection of hMG, all the rats in experimental and control groups
were sacrificed. specimens from uterine tube were fixed in glutaraldehyde and processed for
electron microscopic and morphometric studies. The formalin fixed specimens were used for
TUNEL technique staining. The data were analyzed using student t-test and p<O.05 were
considered significant.
Results: Transmission electron microscopy revealed that in experimental group, in
comparison to control group, the nuelei of epithelial cells were condensed, mitochondria were
disrupted cisternae of rER were dilated and cytoplasm contained numerous fat granules. The
height of the cells were reduced and they were rested on and irregular basal lamina.
Furthermore, the underlying connective tissue contained several apoptotic cells and
macrophages. hMG injection resulted in progression of morphological quality of uterine tube,
however, it could not inhibit electromagnetic field induced changes,
Conclusion: According to our results. electromagnetic field by producing functional and
structural alterations and induction of apoptosis in uterine tube epithelium would interfere with
the normal process of implantation by affecting blastocyst growth and blastocyst transfer
through the uterine tube. These changes could not be prevented by administration ofhMG.

