Objective(s): Injuries and deaths from traffic crashes have become a major public health and socio-economic
problem in Iran. Our study aimed to Investigate patterns of road traffic injuries (RTI) in Shahrood and to
furnish evidence for developing measures and strategies and to improve RTI.
Methods: A descriptive-analytical study was performed on cases of road traffic injury admitted between 21
Mars and 22 Sept 2005 (the first six months of Iranian calendar) to the trauma center of Imam Hosscin
Hospital in Shahrood. Data were collected by a questionnaire and analyzed with regard to demographic, prehospital
and hospital information.
Results: Of the 621 injured traffic victims admitted over the 6-month period, 72% were men. The majority
were in the 20-29y (30/3%) and 13-19y (19/6%) age categories. The mean age of the men and women were
2912±15/2 and 32± 16/6 respectively. Motorcyclists were more likely to be injured in urban areas whereas the
majority of car drivers and occupants had been injured on country roads. Moreover, 63/R% of the subjects
were admitted as inpatients and the mean length of hospitalization was 3 days ± 3/4 and 8 subjects had
undergone amputations. Fracture of bones (4l/4%) was the most common injury: 30% of the road injuries
occurred from 10 am to I pm. A total of 90.1% of motorcycle drivers were not wearing helmets and 44/1% of
injured car drivers were not using seat belt. Thirty-one deaths were recorded, accounting for 18% of all deaths
registered at Imam Hossein Hospital.
Conclusion: This study provides useful information for establishing priorities for the prevention of road
accident injuries. Only a minority uf motorcyclists and car drivers used safety devices (helmet and scat belt
respectively) at the time of accident. Strategies to reduce RTI would include: improving the road traffic
environment, setting road safety rules and ensuring compliance. developing stakeholder coalitions, changing
current perceptions and promotion of healthy practices by enforcing the laws requiring the use of helmets and
safety belts a helmet and searbelt.
