Background and Objective: Due to a high prevalence of osteoporosis and its costs and regarding different
ways of treatment for this disease and lack of knowledge about their efficacy in fracture rate in Iran, this
study was designed in Zanjan to determine fracture rate in hypogonadal osteoporotic women who were on
different types of anti-osteoporotic treatments.
Materials and Methods: In this historical cohort study, 160 osteoporotic women were investigated. They
were under treatment for their osteoporosis during 2001-2007. The cases were divided into 4 groups based
on their type of treatment: I) Calcium 1000 mg/daily + Vit D 200 IU/daily 2) Calcium 500 mg/daily + Vit D
200 IU/daily + Alendronate 10 mg/daily 3) HRT with Calcium D 4) Combination therapy. One group that
didn't receive any type oftreatment, were considered as control group.
At least two densitometries were carried out in each case that the first one being done at the beginning ofthe
study. Bone density was measured in three sites including: hip, spine and forearm with DEXA method. The
rate of osteoporotic fractures was investigated in any site of the body during the follow-up period based on
patient's invitation and their documents. Data were analyzed using Chi square, t-test, Logistic regression and
Kaplan-Meier survival curve.
Results: The rate of fracture was 11% (18 cases). Most of the fractures were non-vertebral (17 cases) and
occurred in ages less than 50 years (17.9%). The most effective treatment to reduce fracture rate was
Alendronate (with 69.9% reduction rate). HRT was as effective as Calcium and Vit D in reducing the
fracture rates. Bone density in forearm region was known as the most vigorous predictive factor of fracture
rate in our study. Most of the fractures were reported in forearm and leg regions (63.3%).
Conclusion: Based on this study it can be concluded that Alendronate is the most effective treatment to
reduce fracture rate in osteoporotic women. Densitometry is also recommended for women under 50 years
old with hypogonadysm for early diagnosis and treatment.
