association with increased morbidity and mortality has been well-documented. Since the condition
can be readily treated, often at low cost, it is logical that efforts should be made to identify
malnutrition for timely nutritional interventions. A nutrition screening tool (a questionnaire) was
designed on the basis of recommendations of the British Association for Parenteral and Enteral
Nutrition and used to identify individuals who are malnourished, at-risk of malnutrition, or may
need nutritional support. The aim of this study was to evaluate the validity and reliability of this tool
in a hospital in Tehran, Iran.
Materials and Methods: A total of 446 patients, aged over 18 years, admitted consecutively to
different wards of Taleghani Hospital in Tehran, Iran during six months were studied in the first 24
hours of admission. For testing validity of the questionnaire used, first a nutritionist made a full
nutritional assessment of all the patients. The assessment included the following items: a.
measurements of weight, height, body mass index (BMI), triceps skinfold (TSF), and mid-arm
circumference (MAC); b. weight history and percentage of involuntary weight loss over the
previous 3-6 months; a 24-hour dietary recall; c. gastro-intestinal symptoms. The results of the
assessment were, then, compared with the results obtained from the screening questionnaire. The
inter-rater reliability of the screening tool was assessed by two nurses who completed the screening
questionnaire separately during 72 hours following admission of the patients. The agreement
between results was calculated.
.Results: There was 66% agreement between the nutritionist’s assessment results and the nurses’s
assessment results using the nutritional screening tool. The sensitivity and specificity of the screeing
tool were 83.7% (95%CI: 80.0-87.4 %) and 84.7% (95%CI: 81.1-88.1 %), respectively. Further
analysis of the data showed the positive predictive value to be 92.3% (95%CI: 89.6-95./0 %) and
the negative predictive value to be 70.2% (95%CI: 65.8-74.8%). The mean inter-rater reliability
(K=0.51) was moderate.
Conclusion: The screening tool, completed separately for each patient by the two nurses, is reliable
and, in comparison with the more objective nutritional assessment, has an acceptable validity. The
questionnaire is useful for identifying malnourished patients in a hospital setting
