Importance of permanent range assessment is advice, because of continuous change, ecological
aspects and economy of rangelands. The wide area of rangelands and facilities limitation for regular
monitoring cause the requirement of the remote sensing application. The objective of present study
was investigation on reliability of ETM+ data for vegetation estimation. The study was carried out
in Markazi province for five years. Satellite data of same time of grand truth data was obtained for
each year. Vegetation indices were calculated after radiometric and geometric correction of images.
Canopy cover of annual species, herbaceous species, grasses, shrub and total cover in five sites
during five years were measured. Measurements were carried out in 60 plots two square meters
rectangular quadrates along four 400 meter parallel transects. Before processing of the information,
15 random selected quadrates were kept for test of equation. In other case all data of four years was
applied to calculate equation between vegetation indices and ground data and data of fifth years was
used for test of model. Considering small area of quadrates against 30'30 meter pixel and
probability of error involved with coordinate measurement by GPS correlation between mean data
of each transect and indices also was studied. The results obtained from equation were compared
with actual cover data using student t-test. Most indices have significant correlation with cover data,
however sometimes equation did not gave correct estimation of cover compared with actual data.
This was happened for life form that did not make considerable percent of vegetation composition.
Generally application of transect data and calculation of equation based on four years data to
estimate of fifth years canopy cover was more suitable way of using satellites data. Certainly using
satellite system with more bands and better resolution and doing soil background correlation in arid
regions would give better results.

