An option for improving soil physical, chemical and biological properties and carbon sequestration is by increasing organic carbon (OC) input through recycling of crop residues and organic manures. The objective of this study was to determine the degradation of some plant residues and the influence of application of plant residue on different chemical and biological forms of OC in soil. The was sampled soil from the top 30-cm layer of an agricultural land treated with mild (d < 2 mm) alfalfa, wheat and sawdust residues, at a rate of 20 g kg-1 (dry weight basis) and incubated in field capacity and lab temperature conditions. After 1, 20, 60 and 120 days of incubation a portion of each soil were taken for analysis. The experiment was considered a completely randomized design as factorial in three replicates. The factors were residues type and the passing time of incubation. Microbial biomass carbon (MBC) increased in all treatments significantly. It increased to the highest values in soil treated with alfalfa (0.472 g kg-1) and wheat (0.372 g kg-1) straws in 20th day of soil incubation. But it increased slowly and continuously in sawdust-amended soil during incubation. The application of plant residue especially alfalfa and wheat straws in soil increased cold water (CW) and hot water (HW) extractable OC significantly. They were 1.75 and 7.15 g kg-1 in alfalfa straw treated soils and 1.13 and 4.40 g kg-1 in wheat straw treated soils respectively in 1st day of soil incubation.  They were significantly higher than those in sawdust treated soil (1.07 and 2.92 g kg-1 soil). Although fulvic acid fraction increased significantly in soil treated with alfalfa and wheat straws in early stages of incubation, but the addition of plant residues did not increase soil fulvic acid in late stages of soil incubation. The increase of humic acid was only significant in alfalfa treated soil. It increased the highest value in alfalfa treated soil (5.04 g kg-1) in 120th day of soil incubation. The study of changes of different chemical and biological fractions of OC during soil incubation and their correlations revealed that MBC had high dependence and coherence with fulvic acid, CW and HW extractable OC. 
