Abstract
Introduction: Propofol is a new intravenous hypnotic drug that in combine with a short acting opioid have been
used in total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA). The SIS provides additional information for standard monitoring
techniques to recognize depth of sleep and achieve the appropriate dose of drug.
Objective: Comparison of different propotol dose for anesthesia induction based on BIS (bispectral index)
monitoring.
Materials and Methods: forty five patients with ASA class l.Il who underwent surgical operation on leg
fracture were randomly assigned to 3 groups. Group A with a propofol dose of Img/kg, Group H at a dose of
1.5mg/kg and Group C at a dose of 2mg/kg were studied. Remifentanyl (O.5mcg/kg) was added to propofol as
opioid drug. The method of SIS index (50-60) has been used for determination of conseiousness level and the
depth of sleep and tor achieving the appropriate dose of propofol. The patients were evaluated to determine
occurrence of hyporensicn. bradycardia, the presence of intubation movement and the autonomic signs.
Resull : The mean levels of BIS was 58.8±9.85 in the Group A, 50.2±6.55 in Group B, and 44±5.65 in Group
C. Comparison between the mean levels of HIS revealed that the Group A was significantly different with the
other two groups(p=0.009).Optimum level of SIS was significantly different in 3 groups .group 13 (oj(166.7),
group A (%40), group C(~;o20), less than of all groups (P=0.034). Hypertension incidence following intubation
in group A was 33.3~.'o and Group S was (%6.7)and in group C wasn't any hypertension which detected a
significantly different between three groups(P=0.OI8). Regarding to need further propofol dose, there was a
significant <.Iifference(P<O.OOl). In group A, it was in %40 of cases, and in groups Sand C it was not observed.
Regarding to taehyeardia, bradycardia, hypotension, movement and autonomic signs. there was no significantly
different between 3 groups.
Conclusion: It was appeared that group A is not appropriate due to incompatible with SIS, need Further
propofol dose and hypertension. Considering the best SIS level in group S and Jack of any benefit in group C for
further propofol in achieving the optimum level of BIS (50-60), can be concluded that group B with propofol
(1.5mglkg) is the best dose for achieving the desired level of SIS with remifentanil at the mentioned dose.
