The Bacillus Calmette Guérin (BCG)-induced/purified protein derivative (PPD)-elicited tuberculin skin test is a reliable measure of cell-mediated immune response (CMIR), specifically delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH); however, its use in livestock may confound diagnosis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Therefore, various alternative antigen/adjuvant combinations were evaluated as inducers of DTH that were compared to the BCG/PPD test system with the purpose of finding a skin DTH protocol that does not cross-react with the tuberculin test and allows identification of high and low CMIR responder phenotypes. Specifically, 30 non-lactating cows (five/treatment) were sensitized on day 0 with mycobacteria [BCG, M. tuberculosis or Mycobacterium phlei cell wall extract (MCWE)], and ovalbumin (OVA) emulsified in Freund's complete adjuvant (FCA), non-ulcerative Freund's adjuvant (NUFA), complete NUFA or MCWE. On day 21, cows were injected intradermally with various test antigens including PPD tuberculin, phlein, and OVA. Phosphate buffered saline was included as the negative control and the T-cell mitogen phytohemagglutinin (PHA) was also administered. Double skin-fold thickness was evaluated before and at 6, 24, and 48 h post-injection. Skin biopsies were taken at 24 and 48 h to assess oedema, necrosis, and inflammatory cell infiltration. BCG/PPD and M. phlei/phlein treatments when given with a Freund's adjuvant induced equivalent DTH with peak reactions at 24–48 h after antigen injection. Cows receiving NUFA had fewer injection site granulomas than FCA or CNUFA treatments. The change in skin thickness response to PHA peaked at 6 h. Only cows receiving mycobacteria in NUFA had skin response to OVA, which peaked 6–24 h post-injection. Only sites tested with PPD or phlein had significantly higher lymphocyte infiltration than control, whereas neutrophils were significantly higher at PHA test sites and eosinophils predominated at the PHA test sites. Macrophages were significantly more numerous at the PPD and/or phlein test sites in treatment groups that received killed mycobacteria in a Freund's adjuvant and/or with BCG, and at the PHA test sites in all treatment groups. It was concluded that the M. phlei/phlein system did induce DTH and was similar to the DTH induced by the BCG/PPD system when MCWE was administered with a Freund's adjuvant. Therefore, this protocol is suitable for detecting high/low CMIR responders in research herds. However, cross-reaction to PPD was evident following induction of DTH using M. phlei. Hence, this protocol does not alleviate the problem of artificial induction of DTH cross-reactivity and would not be suitable for commercial herds where tuberculin testing is required.
