The purpose of study was to evaluate the Effectiveness of Government Plans and Policies for Universal Primary Education in Pakistan to identify the impediments that hindered the efforts for achievement of UPE in Pakistan and suggest measures to improve the state with regard to universalization of Primary Education in the country. The main objective of the study were: (i) to review the Government education policies, plans and the provision for the achievement of UPE in Pakistan, (ii) to critically analyze policy statements, implementation procedures, provisions and strategies, (iii) to identify factors affecting the implementation of plans and policies regarding UPE and (iv) to suggest measures to make the plans and policies more effective in achieving UPE in Pakistan. All education policies and Development Plans, developed since inception of Pakistan were analyzed to evaluate their effectiveness. In addition opinion of Planners, Administrators, Heads of institutions and teachers was gathered through submission of an exhaustive questionnaire administered in person. Part I of the questionnaire included major factors like economical, physical, administrative, students’ related factors, teachers’ related factors, curriculum related factors, students’ school leaving reasons, accessibility factors and policy/plan implementation factors to seek the respondents’ view about their effects on efforts to achieve UPE. In part II 30 items from part I were selected and the respondents were asked to prioritize these factor and in the part III of the questionnaire the respondent were asked to prioritize the remedial measures to overcome the effects of 30 factors selected in part II, on efforts to achieve UPE. The total sample included 1000 subjects which comprised 120 planners, administrators and heads of institutions, and 880 teachers from different strata of schools stratified as Federal Government Educational Institutions(C/G), educational institutions of Federal Government Educational Directorate, Islamabad, educational institutions of Directorate of Elementary Education, Rawalpindi, Army Public Schools, and educational institutions of NGOs. Document analysis of educational policies and the plans, revealed that the major objective of these entire document was to achieve UPE since the inception in Pakistan in 1947. UPE has been repeated by number of national conferences and The purpose of study was to evaluate the Effectiveness of Government Plans and Policies for Universal Primary Education in Pakistan to identify the impediments that hindered the efforts for achievement of UPE in Pakistan and suggest measures to improve the state with regard to universalization of Primary Education in the country. The main objective of the study were: (i) to review the Government education policies, plans and the provision for the achievement of UPE in Pakistan, (ii) to critically analyze policy statements, implementation procedures, provisions and strategies, (iii) to identify factors affecting the implementation of plans and policies regarding UPE and (iv) to suggest measures to make the plans and policies more effective in achieving UPE in Pakistan. All education policies and Development Plans, developed since inception of Pakistan were analyzed to evaluate their effectiveness. In addition opinion of Planners, Administrators, Heads of institutions and teachers was gathered through submission of an exhaustive questionnaire administered in person. Part I of the questionnaire included major factors like economical, physical, administrative, students’ related factors, teachers’ related factors, curriculum related factors, students’ school leaving reasons, accessibility factors and policy/plan implementation factors to seek the respondents’ view about their effects on efforts to achieve UPE. In part II 30 items from part I were selected and the respondents were asked to prioritize these factor and in the part III of the questionnaire the respondent were asked to prioritize the remedial measures to overcome the effects of 30 factors selected in part II, on efforts to achieve UPE. The total sample included 1000 subjects which comprised 120 planners, administrators and heads of institutions, and 880 teachers from different strata of schools stratified as Federal Government Educational Institutions(C/G), educational institutions of Federal Government Educational Directorate, Islamabad, educational institutions of Directorate of Elementary Education, Rawalpindi, Army Public Schools, and educational institutions of NGOs. Document analysis of educational policies and the plans, revealed that the major objective of these entire document was to achieve UPE since the inception in Pakistan in 1947. UPE has been repeated by number of national conferences and
