Background and Objectives: Presently there are several methods for determination of the extent
of lactose hydrolysis in milk, some of which, despite high precision and reliability, arc not used
extensively due to their high cost. The objective of this study was to compare effectiveness 3 of
such methods, namely, HPLC, freezing point measurement, and chloramines-T, with a view to
finding a suitable and less expensive method.
Materials and Methods: The lactose content of skimmed milk samples was measured, followed by
treatment for 4 hours with p-galactosidase to hydrolyze lactose and then determining the extent of
hydrolysis using the HPLC, freezing point, and chloramines-T methods.
Results: The p-galactosidase exerted its maximum effect during the first 2 hours, resulting in
reduction of the lactose content to less than 0.5% of its original value. In the HPLC method, the
percentage of relative standard deviation (%RSD) for the milk samples after 2 hours treatment with
the enzyme was more than 40% and the reproducibility was not desirable. With regard to the
freezing-point method, after a 2-hour decreasing trend of the freezing point the rate of decrease
slowed down. The freezing point decreased about -0.274 °C after 4 hours, such that for every 1%
hydrolysis of lactose the freezing point decreased by 0.0028 °C. Furthermore, no linear relationship
was observed between the freezing point and the rate oflactose hydrolysis at rates higher than 88%.
Finally, in the chloramines-T method, it was shown that with increasing lactose hydrolysis, the
consumption of sodium thiosulfate decreased, the trend slowing down after 2 hours. On the whole,
in the preliminary stages of hydrolysis (the first 60%) the amounts of lactose determined by the 3
methods was almost similar, but after that the chloramines-T method gave figures slightly different
from those given by the other 2 methods.
Conclusions: Since the correlation between the HPLC and the freezing point methods was very
high (r' ~0.9976), it can be concluded that the freezing point can be recommended as an
appropriate, simple, precise and rapid method for the assessment of lactose concentration, as well as
determining its hydrolysis extent, in enzyme-treated milk. Furthermore, the chlorarnine-T method
can be said to be suitable for determination oflactose in untreated milks.


