Background and Objective: Poverty is one of the most important malnutrition risk factors. As onethird
of the households headed by mothers are in the population's lower deciles of income, their
children are more vulnerable to malnutrition. This study was performed to assess the nutritional status
ofunder-5-year old children in mother-headed households under coverage of the Imam Khomeini Relief
Foundation of Tehran in 2005.
Materials and Metbods: This was a descriptive cross-sectional study in which the sample households
were randomly selected, proportionately, from 8 regions (in the northern, southern, eastern, western,
and central parts of Tehran) of the Tehran Imam Khomeini Relief Foundation. In each region, all the
under-5-year old children (n= 137) in those mother-headed households who had active health files and
whose mothers had signed the informed consent entered the study. Data were collected through
interviews with mothers, using a questionnaire containing items on demographic characteristics of the
household and the children's diet history of the first and second years of life; the interviewers were
experienced nutrition (BSc) graduates. In addition, anthropometric measurements were made using
standard methods. To determine the nutritional status, weight and height figures were compared with the
US National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) standards. Data were analyzed using the Bpi-info and
SPSS software.
Results: The lindings showed that (1). The mean age of the mothers was 31 ± 4.7 years, 67% of them
had 2 or 3 children, less than 10% were working, 47 % lived in rented accommodation, and their
highest level of education (42%) was guidance-school education; (2). About 95% of the children had
been fed colostrum and 67% had been breastfed exclusively for the first 6 months of life; (3).
Complementary feeding and family food introduction had started for 55% and 30% of the children at a
suitable age, respectively; (4). The prevalence rates of underweight, wasting, overweight, and stunting
were 11%,6%,5% and 10%, respectively; (5). Based on the logistic regression analysis, the odds ratio
(OR) of underweight in girls was 6.39 as compared to boys (Cl 95%: 1.56-27.35), and the OR of
underweight in children of illiterate or elementary-education level mothers was 6.29 as compared with
the children of mothers with guidance-school education (CI 95%: 1.23-29.60).
Conclusion: This study showed that the under-5-year old children in the mother-headed households
suffer from different degrees of malnutrition. Programs and activities, such as mothers' education in
living skills and increasing their literacy level, as well as targeted food aid/subsidies along with nutrition
education, are highly recommended to improve the present situation

