Lameness is a major health issue and likely the single most common cause of pain and discomfort in dairy cattle. Appropriate treatment is delayed or neglected due, in part, to lack of reliable detection. Assessment of cows with lameness is currently limited to subjective visual scoring systems based on locomotion and posture abnormalities. These systems are unreliable to detect lameness, and therefore, a large number of cows remain undiagnosed. The objective of this research was to search for potential biomarkers for lameness-associated painful inflammatory foot lesions in dairy cattle using microarray-based gene expression profiling of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). BOTL5 microarrays spotted in duplicate with cDNA representing bovine immune response genes were interrogated with cDNA samples in an eight-array, balanced complete block design with dye swap. Samples from eight lame cows with inflammatory foot lesions and from eight sound cows were pair-matched by age, weight, days in lactation, and pregnancy status at time of PBMC collection and directly compared with each other on individual arrays. Statistical analysis of resulting fluorescence intensity data revealed 31 genes that were putatively differentially expressed in lame versus sound cows (P &lt; 0.05). Of these, BLASTn analysis and gene ontology information showed that 28 genes had high similarity or homology to known human and/or rodent genes. Validation of 15 of these genes known to be important in inflammation and pain was carried out using relative quantitative real-time RT-PCR, which confirmed the up-regulation of interleukin (IL)-2 (12.68 ± 1.47-fold increase) and IL-10 (2.39 ± 0.55-fold increase), matrix metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13) (10.44 ± 1.14-fold increase), and chemokine C–C motif receptor-5 (CCR5) (5.26 ± 1.05-fold increase), in lame relative to sound cows (P ≤ 0.05). Similarly, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor alpha chain precursor (GM-CSF-R-alpha) (2.30 ± 0.63-fold increase) and IL-4 (2.06 ± 0.59-fold increase) showed a tendency (P = 0.10) for up-regulation in lame compared to sound cows. PBMC co-expression of IL-2, MMP-13, CCR5 and IL-10, and potentially IL-4 and GM-CSF-R-alpha appears to be a promising, objective sign of lameness-related inflammatory foot lesions in dairy cattle. In conclusion, this study revealed potential biomarkers of the presence of foot lesions that could boost diagnostic accuracy of lameness and, ultimately, help identify animals in need of pain relief.
