Johne's disease (JD), caused by Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP), is estimated to infect more than 22% of US dairy herds. Periods of immunosuppression may contribute to the transition from the subclinical to the clinical stage of infection. Understanding the effects of stressors such as parturition on the escalation of disease may provide information that will help to manage JD. The objective of this study was to characterize cytokine gene expression and secretion in periparturient dairy cows naturally infected with MAP. Blood was collected from the jugular vein of healthy noninfected, and subclinically and clinically infected dairy cows for 3 weeks pre-calving to 4 weeks post-calving. Real-time PCR was performed to evaluate the expression of the following cytokine genes by peripheral blood mononuclear cells: IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-12p35, IL-10, TGF-β, and IL-4. To assess the effects of parturient immunosuppression on cytokine gene expression, RT-PCR data were analyzed by using 2−ddCt values calibrated to dCt value at +1 day relative to calving for each animal. Overall, cytokine gene expression was not influenced by infection status of the cows in this study. However, significant effects in cytokine gene expression were noted across sampling days within the periparturient period. Expression of IFN-γ by NS and ConA-stimulated PBMCs declined at calving compared with prepartum values in both control and infected cows. Similarly, a decline in expression of IL-4 and IL-10 was observed for cells isolated from subclinically infected cows after stimulation with ConA. ConA-stimulated PBMCs isolated from infected cows secreted higher concentrations of IFN-γ compared with the controls. A significant decline in IFN-γ secretion was noted for MPS-stimulated cells for clinical cows from −21 days to +1 day. Stimulating cells with MPS resulted in greater secretion of IL-10 by infected cows during the postpartum period. A trend was also observed for higher TGF-β secretion by NS PBMCs isolated from clinical cows in the postpartum period. Cells isolated from clinically infected cows and stimulated with MPS secreted higher levels of nitric oxide throughout the periparturient period when compared to control or subclinically infected cows. These data suggest that parturition is a very dynamic time period for host immunity, with potential for altered immunity to hinder the ability of dairy cows to thwart infectious diseases.
