Salinity is one of the most serious threats to yield reduction of crop and resulted to depletion of
natural vegetation in many parts of world especially in Iran. Sesbania aculeata is moderately salt
tolerant and may be utilized as forage crop for reclamation in semi-saline lands. The objective of the
present study was evaluation of salt tolerance in Sesbania aculeata and investigation of the roles of
potassium nutrition in salt effects alleviation. Plants were cultivated in greenhouse with Hoagland
nutrient solution in sand culture. The experiment were conducted in completely randomized deign as a
factorial. Factor one was salinity treatments including 0 and 100 mM NaCI and factor two was
potassium treatments including I, 2.5, 5, 10, IS, 20 and 40 mM K+. The plants harvested after 2
months treatments. The identified parameters were included fresh and dry mass, Na+ and K+,
concentration and biochemical parameters including chlorophyll a and b, soluble sugar, amino acids
content and peroxidase activity. The results indicated salinity reduced plants growth and decreased
relative water content and imposed ions imbalance in plants tissues. Increase of salinity in root
medium resulted to increment ofNa+ and cr concentration and decrease of K" and K+lNa+ ratio. Also,
Salinity induced marked increase in peroxidase activity. Potassium treatments without salinity could
be divided to 3 parts including critical, luxury and toxic nutrition. The optimum of plant growth was
achieved in I roM potassium treatment without salinity and potassium toxicity in 40 mM K+ treatment
caused increase in peroxidase activity and amino acids content and decrease of soluble sugar and
consequently resulted to lower growth. In critical potassium nutrition (1 mM K+), Na+ and cr toxicity
caused increase in peroxidase activity that resulted to relatively the lower growth under salinity.
Salinity was intensified potassium toxicity (40 mM Ki, decreased soluble sugar, increased peroxidase
activity and consequently induced drastic growth reduction. The highest growth of plants under
salinity was observed in 2.5 mM potassium nutrition. The results indicated that salinity enhanced
potassium demand in Sesbania aculeate up to a threshold.
