Introduction
Groundwater level forecasting is one of the most
important factors in hydrogeological studies. Artificial
Neural Network (ANN) models are among the black
box models much suitable for nonlinear systems. The
ability to identify a relationship from given patterns
make it possible for ANNs to solve complex hydrologic
problems. Concepts and applications of the ANN
models in hydrology have been discussed by the ASCE
(2000) and Asghari Moghaddam et a1. (2008). Neural
networks have also been previously applied
successfully to temporal prediction of groundwater
levels in alluvials (Daliakopoulos et aI., 2005).
Geostatistics is another powerful interpolating
approach widely utilized in spatial estimation of
hydrological variables (Goovaerts, 2000) such as
groundwater level mapping (Hoeksema et al., 1989).
Rizzo and Dougherty (1994) introduced the idea of
Neural-kriging for characterization of aquifer
properties.
Objective,
In some parts of the Tabriz underground construction
project the groundwater levels are high which show the
necessity of groundwater modeling. Due to the high
complexity of Tabriz aquifer, the combination of ANN
and geostatistic models for spatiotemporal prediction of
groundwater levels are used in the study area. Results were applied as inputs of the geostatistical model for
spatial forecasting ofgroundwater levels.
Methodology
Several neural networks are evaluated in order to reach
the required efficiency and to find the suitable
technique for presenting ANN models. Two popular
neural network models are the Feedforward Neural
Network (FNN) and the Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN). Different algorithms can be used for training
these networks. In the present research, gradient
descent with momentum and adaptive learning rate
backpropagation (GDX), Levenberg-Marquardt (LM),
and Bayesian Regularization (BR) are used. Some
studies provided details of the used networks and
algorithms in ANN modeling (e.g.. Coulibaly et al.,
2001a). Several aspects of the architecture (structure)
of neural networks that focus on the prediction of
variables associated with hydrology are covered by
Maier and Dandy (2000). Their suggestions were
followed for temporal water level forecasting of Tabriz
aquifer and the structures of the network were
determined by trial and error. The size of the input and
hidden layers of the network have been determined
considering the prediction target and the output layer
has just a single node; predicted water level. The
activation function of the hidden layer was set to a
hyperbolic tangent sigmoid function as this proved by
trial and error to be the best in depicting the nonlinearity
of the modeled natural system. among a set of
other options (linear and log sigmoid). Finally, the
number of the hidden layer nodes and the training
epoch number were optimized in terms of obtaining
precise and accurate output.Presenting a hybrid neural-geosratistics (NG) modcl,
the external 24 monthly temporal data of ANN models
were used as the input data of the geostaristic modeL
The model can use different methods depending on the
subject or the problem. In order to obtain the best
method of the geostatistical approach, different
methods were examined; I) Nearest Neighbor (N.N.),
2) Kriging, 3) Polynomial Regression (P.R.), 4) Radial
Basis Function (R.B.F.), 4) Moving Average (M.A.), 5)
Inverse Distance to a Power (I.D.P.), 6) Minimum
Curvature (M.C.), 7) Modified Sheperds Method
(M.S.M.) and 8) Local Polynomial (L.P.). These
methods were described in detail by Isaaks and
Srivastava (1989).
-1 391836
-1 181029
R.esiduals ,
602000 4214950 12 136343
Table L Residuals for predicted groundwater level
in testing step,

For achieving the neural-geostatistical spatiotemporal
forecasting model the external 24 monthly temporal
data of ANN models were utilized as input data in the
geostatistic model for spatial connections. In order to
obtain the best method of the geostatistical approach,
different methods (mentioned in methodology) were
examined. In order to obtain the best geostatistical
method, the first month of predicted data by ANN
model for considered piezometers were fed into the
eight methods as input data sets. The N.N method
presented the best method connection among the
forecasting data. This method was then utilized for
making connection among other 24 months of
forecasting, so that for each month. forecasted data
produced a neural-geostatistical model. Similarly
monthly predicted contours can also be presented (for
I th to 24'" month). The efficiency of the hybrid neuralgeostatistic
model were tested by the four piezometers
not utilized in model calibration. The results of this
testing are presented in Table I.

values by FNN-LM Model, A) Training step, B) Test
step, Conclusion
ANN and geostatistic models each have a high ability
in spatial and temporal prediction of hydrogeological
phenomena. The combination of these models can
result in an improved tool. In this research, a
combination of the models were utilized as a hybrid
spatiotemporal model of groundwater level prediction
in multilayer aquifer in Tabriz city area. The obtained
results represented suitable spatiotemporal prediction
of groundwater levels in the study area. Methodology
of this study can solve most of the existing problems in
spatiotemporal groundwater level prediction in aquifer
spatially multilayer aquifers. Furthermore, results of
this research could prevent spending high costs for
borehole drillings in Tabriz underground construction.
