Introduction
The sustainability of irrigated agriculture depends on
the consistency of high irrigation efficiency. During a
sprinkler irrigation, a relevant part of the water
discharged by the irrigation system does not reach the
crop canopy. This unaccounted water is referred to as
"wind drift and evaporation losses" or "spray losses"
(Ls), and is expressed as a percentage of the gross
volume of irrigation water.
In hot and semi-arid areas, these losses would be
significant. Thus a proper understanding of the factors
affecting spray losses (Ls) in different sprinkler
irrigation systems is important for developing water
conservation strategies.
Trimmer (1987) developed an equation based on the
nomograph of Frost and Schwalen (1955) that enables
the user to estimate the percentage of evaporation loss
during sprinkler irrigation as a function of the sprinkler
characteristics, the operating pressure, and the climate
factors.
The magnitude of the losses can be very relevant under
certain conditions. While some authors reported losses
of 5-10% under a moderate evaporative demand
(Keller and Bliesner, 1990), others signaled maximum
losses of 30% (Spurgeon et al., 1983).
Spurgeon et al. (1983) reported that hot, dry, and windy
conditions eould cause spray losses from sprinkler
irrigation systems to approach 30% of the water
applied. In the hot and semi-arid meteorological conditions of
Zaragoza (Spain) the average spray losses for the
experimental moving lateral amounted to 9.8% during
the day and 5.0% during the night (Playan et al., 2005).
Objective
The objective of this paper is to propose a
mathematical equation for correct and exact estimation
by characterizing Ls under different weather conditions
for semi-portable hand-move sprinkler systems in the
hot and semi-arid conditions of the Khouzestan
province.
Methodology
The selected irrigation system is in the southeastern
part of the Khouzestan province in Iran, 50°17'37" east
and 30"30'45" north.
The standard ISO 7749/2 (1990) and ASAE S398.1
(2001) have been taken into account to determine Ls.
To conduct tests, a pumping set is supplied from a deep
well. Weather conditions (e.g. dry bulb temperature,
wet bulb temperature, and wind speed) are collected
through a weather station, located 50 m away from the
test site. This information is all registered with a fiveminute
frequency.
For the analysis of Ls in the hot and semi-arid
conditions, 40 tests have been carried out at operating
pressures from 45 to 50 m. The impact sprinkler used
in outdoor single-sprinkler tests is the VYR155 with
the temal nozzles of 11*6.3*3.2mm.
The statistical analysis of Ls was carried out using the
SPSS and Excel software packages. The relative error
(AMRE), the standard error (S.E.), and the coefficient of pearson (R') were used for
equation obtained from the
regression model. 
Results and Discussion
In this study the wind speed ranged from 0 to 6.77 mis,
the air temperature ranged from 21.4 to 44.9"c, the
relative humidity ranged from 11.8 to 80%, and the
vapour pressure deficit ranged from 0.63 to 8.42 kpa,
The maximum Ls in the worst meteorological condition
in the southern region of Khouzcstan province was
26.8% at 13 to 15 o'clock, when the relative humidity
was the lowest and the air temperature, the wind speed,
and the vapour pressure deficit were the highest. The
best condition was attained when the irrigation is done
at night, during early morning, or early evening, In this
case, Ls is usually smaller than 1-2%. The results
switching irrigation from day to night reduced Ls
strongly, A new equation is introduced in this research for
estimating Ls under the hot and semi-arid conditions.
The best regression coefficient (R') was obtained with
the nonlinear multiple regression modeL This model
was performed to evaluate how the meteorological
variables could explain Ls. Wind and vapour pressure
defieit were the most explicative variables.
The analysis with SPSS showed whole terms of the
model resulted highly significant (P ~0,05), The fit
parameters as well as the expression of the model were:
Ls=5.4*wn·6 +7.4*(e, _eJJ
·
45 -6.1 (1)
(R' ~ 0,94 , S,E ~ 2,0 ,AMRE ~ 0,23)
where Ls is the spray losses (%), W is the wind speed
(mls), e, - e" is the vapour pressure deficit (kPa),
Losses estimated from the Frost and Schwalen (1955)
method were compared to the values of the field
measurements. The comparison of results showed that
the Ls values estimated from the Frost and Schwalen
(1955) method were 6% less than the field values or the
values of simulated Ls with the equation (1)
moderately, Phocaides (2000) suggests that in winds of over 3.5
rn/s, sprinkling is not recommended. The above
obtained equation showes that Ls exceeded 21.9%
when the wind speed and vapour pressure deficit
increase more than 3.5 m/s and 6 kpa, respectively.
Therefore, to avoid excessive Ls, sprinkler irrigation
systems should not be operated in the early afternoon
hours in the summer or windy conditions. The amount
of loss would be very small (mainly 1% to 2%) for
operation during night time, early morning, and early
evening hours.
