Introduction
Abundant flood events occur in Iran mainly due to
variations in spatial and temporal patterns of rainfall
along with the mis-management of watersheds.
Because of the large economical and environmental
effects of floods, it is necessary to control and reduce
their damages. There are several methods for flood
control. Rockfill dams arc one of the best methods to
store flood volume and deplete the flood peak. Flood
control by these structures requires a hydraulic design
which is dependent on the behavior of the flow in
coarse porous media. Many studies have considered the
flow through coarse porous media, but the effects of the
over-flow on the flow through porous media has rarely
been mentioned. In this paper simultaneous through
and over-flow in rockfill dams 1S investigated
experimentally.
Objectives
Understanding the flood flow mechanisms in rockfill
dams and investigating the effects of over-flow on
through-flow was the main objective of this study. The
stage-discharge relation in overtopping rockfill dams
was obtained and an experimental model for flood
discharge in rockfill dams were developed. In this
study an experimental setup was developed to
investigate simultaneous through and over-flow in
rockfill darns. Using dimensional analysis, the
governing functional equation of simultaneous flow
was obtained and finally the constant and coefficients
were derived.
Methodology
Because of fully turbulent flow in rockfill dams and
severe interaction between over and through-flow in
rockfill dams. the flow pattern and mechanism are fully
complicated. There are three major types of flow in
rockfill dams; A) Through-flow in rockfill dams. where
flood flows only in the porous body of the dam and
there is non-darcian free flow in rocks (Samani et aI.,
2003; Samani and Shaiannejad, 2004; and Michiuka et
al., 2005). B) Submerged flow in rockfill dams, where
rockfill dam or rock mass IS submerged and
downstream level of water is higher than the dam
height which consists of two types of flow, one
pressurized non-Darcy flow in rockfill and the other
open channel flow over the rockfill dam (Li and Graga,
1998). C) Unsubmerged Simultaneous through and
over-flow, where rockfill dam overtops and flood flows
freely through and over the rockfill dam which consists
of two types of flow; one free non-Darcy flow in the
body of the rockfill dam and the other spatially varied
flow over the rockfill dam. There is no special research
on Unsubmerged Simultaneous through and over-flow
in rockfill dams. so in this paper this type of flow in
rockfill dams is investigated experimentally.
Dimensional analysis and experiments
Based on the physical characteristics of simultaneous
over and through-flow in rockfill dams, the previous
studies, and the results ofthc initial experimental tests,
the non-dimensional functional relation of
simultaneous flow discharge using dimensional
analysis technique is derived inventionally: q - d g J6 p' p' , p' H - d d g
d
where Cd is the discharge coefficient, H, is the head of
water upstream of the dam, g is the acceleration due to
the gravity, f is the function symbol, P is the dam
height, L is the thickness of the dam, S is the slope of
the up-downstream slopes, DH is the difference
between the upstream and the downstream depth of
water, and q is the discharge per unit width of the dam.
The main objective of this paper is to derive the
relation between Cd and the five dimensionless
parameters of HiP, UP, S, diP, and DH/P. Results and Discussion
The effects of dimensionless parameters of equation (I)
on Cd were investigated through 240 runs. The
functional relation of C, was odtained. Based on the
experimental results an increase in the upstream depth
of water caused an increase in the flow discharge. In
low flow rates, the dominant flow is the through-flow
and the variation in upstream depth of water was highly
affected by the discharge variations. In large flow rates,
the variation in upstream depth is less affected by
discharge variations. This was mainly because of the
domination of the through-flow in low flows. In this
condition the dam behaves as an underflow structure
while in large flows it behaves as an overflow
hydraulic structure. The variation of the discharge
coefficient with HiP, UP, S, dIP, and DHiP is
presented in fig. I. Finally the mathematical relation of
Cd in rockfill dams was derived by a nonlinear
regression analysis;
P DII
{ J
II. 11361 /1-) [ J-0 Oil, II) c; =0.29 ~ .1 DH ,I n, H d
-UO\i7(!::..) -U83r!!.-) [~] r [~] P [sin(PJ]-683,,,nIPIl
with R'~0.936 and RMSE~O.OO I. This equauon can be
used to estimate the simultaneous over and thorough
flow rates in rockfill dams and the design of detention
rockfill dams to reduce the output flood peak.
- HU 0.5, [Hd ~ S ~ DHJ- C H" 0.5 ( I ) q - d g J6 p' p' , p' H - d d g
d
where Cd is the discharge coefficient, H, is the head of
water upstream of the dam, g is the acceleration due to
the gravity, f is the function symbol, P is the dam
height, L is the thickness of the dam, S is the slope of
the up-downstream slopes, DH is the difference
between the upstream and the downstream depth of
water, and q is the discharge per unit width of the dam.
The main objective of this paper is to derive the
relation between Cd and the five dimensionless
parameters of HiP, UP, S, diP, and DH/P.
Conclusion
In this paper unsubmerged simultaneous through and
over-flow in flood detention rockfill dams has been
investigated experimentally. Based on the experimental
results, a non-linear regressive equation for discharge
estimation with a correlation coefficient of 0.936 and
root-mean-square-errors of 0.001 has been proposed.
Results also showed that the flow rate has been directly
affected by the ratio of the dam height to the upstream
head, the ratio of material size to the dam height, and
the submerged ratio. The flow rate has been inversely
affected by the ratio of the dam length to the dam
height, and the upstream and downstream side slopes.
