Objective: Proteinuria and hypertension are predictors of poor renal and cardiovascular
outcome in diabetic patients. Blockade of the renin-angiotensin system is an established
strategy to interfere with progression of renal failure in diabetic patients. Angiotensinconverting
enzyme inhibitors (ACEls) and Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) prevent the
progression of diabetic nephropathy (ON). Combination of renin-angiotensin system (RAS)inhibiting
therapy provides additive benefit in type 1 diabetic patients with diabetic
nephropathy. This study tested whether this dual blockade is superior to either drug alone in
type 2 diabetic patients with diabetic nephropathy (ON).
Subjects and Methods: To assess and compare the effects of enalapril (up to 40 mg/day),
losartan (up to 100 mg/day) and combination therapy (enalapril up to 40mg/day plus losartan
up to 100mg/day) on urinary protein excretion and renal failure progression. 144 type II
diabetic patients with diabetic nephropathy (proteinuria>300mg/14h) and normal or slightly
reduced renal function (Cr clearance = 76±42mLlmin) were enrolled in a twelve months,
prospective, open, randomized trial. All patients were re-evalated after 2, 6 and 12 months.
Results: One hundred and forty four type 2 diabetic patients with ON (88 male and 66
female; mean age: 53±16.31 years) were recruited. Renal function, estimated by creatinine
clearance, remained stable throughout the study. Hyperkalemia was more frequent in patients
treated with enalapril alone or enalapril plus losartan (P<0.002) than in those on losartan
alone. The blood pressure goal «115/75 mm Hg) was achieved by week 8 in all treatment
groups (P<0.005 when compared to baseline). Proteinuria decreased significantly in all
patients after two months (P<O.OOI) and remained stable afterward. At the end of study
proteinuria was reduced significantly (P<0.05). Combination therapy was statistically more
effective in proteinuria reduction than treatment with losartan alone (P=0.021) and than
treatment with enalapril alone (P=O.O 18).
Conclusion: Dual blockade of the RAS with both an ACE1 and ARB is associated with more
reduction in proteinuria to either drug alone in type 2 diabetic patients with ON. Antiproteinuric
effect during the combined therapy was not related to changes in renal function
and blood pressure
