Objective: Urinary Tract infection is the most common disease in children and its treatment
is vital for prevention of subsequent complications. Currently gentamicin is used three-times a
day as a common treatment for urinary infection, but this type of treatment has side effects.
This study is done to determine thc effect of once-a-day intravascular injection of gentamicin
for urinary tract infection in children.
Subjects and Methods: This study is a standard clinical trial was conducted on 66 patients
with clinical symptoms of upper urinary infection aged between 3 months to 12 years who
were hospitalized in Razi Hospital of Kermanshah. Both groups were completely equal with
regard to age, weight and other CBC indexes. In control group (n=36) ampicillin was used
and gentamicin was employed 3 times a day. In experimental group (n=30), the same amount
of ampicillin was used whereas gentamicin WJS administered once-a-day. The treatment
duration was 10-14 days. In the first 7 days, gentamicin was injected intravasculcrly, while in
the other days it was used orally. After receiving microbial sensitivity tcstx results, arnpicil lin
was eliminated from treatment regimen. After termination treatment period, the patients were
followed up for 6 months. Descriptive statistics and X2 and Fisher Exact Test were employed
to analyze of the data.
Results: 29 patients (80.5%) of control group and 24 patients (80%) of experimental group
were less than 5 years old. The mean weight of patients in control and experimental groups
were 15 ± 8.6 and 14 ± 9.2 kg respectively. 25 patients (69.4%) of control group and 23 (76.7)
patients of experimental group were females. In most of the cases E. Coli was the responsible
organism and that the most common finding in the urinary analysis of the patients was
increasing the number of neutrophills. Respond to the treatment was 97.2% in control group
and 96.7% in experimental group (P>0.05). The relapse rate was 29% in control group and
33.3% in experimental group. Scar was seen 19.2% in control group and 22.2 in experimental
group. In analysis with X2-test, no significant statistically difference was seen between the
two groups regarding relapse and scar development (P>O.05)
Conclusions: Gentamicin, administration as a once-a-day treatment is equally effective as
three times a day in children with upper urinary tract infection.
