Objective: Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) represent one of the leading causes of
occupational injury and disability in the developed and industrially developing countries. For
this reason, many researches have been conducted on MSDs and risk factor evaluation
techniques. This study was conducted among workers of a rubber factory in Shiraz with the
objectives of a) determination of WMSDs prevalence and b) evaluation of level of exposure
to WMSDs risk factors. The results of this study can be used to develop WMSDs preventive
strategies in the workplace and improve workers' health.
Subjects and Metbods: In this descriptive cross-sectional study, all 16 production units of
the factory were studied. In each unit, 50% of the workers were randomly selected and
included in the study. Totally, 454 workers participated. Nordic Musculoskeletal
Questionnaire (NMQ) was used to study prevalence of WMSDs and QEC technique was
applied to evaluate physical exposure to the risk factors. Photography technique was used to
collect required data from each worker and each workstation. In all, 56 workstations were
photographed. Data was analyzed using SPSS (Version13).
Results: Means of age and job tenure were 29.8±7.3 and 6.6±6.1 years, respectively. 73.6%
of the workers suffered from some kind of symptoms during the last 12 months. The highest
prevalence was reported in lower back (50.2%), knees (48.5%) and upper back (38.1%).
Statistical analyses showed that there was an association between the QEC level of risk and
MSDs symptoms (P<O.OOI).
Conclusion: This study demonstrated that WMSDs occurred at a high rate in the study
population. Major ergonomic problems were found to be awkward postures, manual material
handling and back rotation and bending. Furthermore, based on the results, QEC was found to
be an appropriate and reliable technique for evaluating level of exposure to WMSDs risk
factors Implementation of interventional corrective measures to reduce level of workers'
exposure to WMSDs risk factors was essential.
