Objective: Non-ulcer-dyspepsia (NUD) is the fullness of abdomen after meals, early satiety,
bloating but nausea or burning sensation, heart burn or pyrosis without epigastric pain. The aim of
the present study was to evaluate the role of Helicobacter pylori H pylori the pathogenesis of
NUD and assess the effectiveness of eradication of HP in its improvement.
Subjects and Methods: This clinical trial study including 90 patients of NUD and positive for
HP. Upper G[ endoscopy and rapid urease test were carried out. These patients were divided into
two groups, Treatment group received omeprazole 20mg BID, furazolidone IOOmg TDS,
amoxicillin 1000mg BID and bismuth subcitrate [20 rng QID) for 14 days and followed by two
weeks of omeprazole 20 mg BID, The eradication of HP was confirmed by upper Gl endoscopy
and antral and body biopsy for pathology six weeks after the end of treatment. The controlled
group was treated with omeprazole 20 mg BID for four weeks, Both groups were treated with H2
antagonist for a further one year period. The patients were followed up at three month, six and
twelve months. The data were analyzed with per protocol analysis.
Results: During follow up of three, six and twelve months, the incidence of improvement in
symptom in control group was greater, especially during the twelve months follow up, The
improvement was statistically significant. Satisfactory improvement was seen in 28 patients
(70%), unsatisfactory improvement were seen in 12 patients (30%) in treatment group, in
comparison with them control group in which satisfactory improvement was seen in 16 (41%)
and, unsatisfactory improvement in 21 (59%) patients (P=O,OI), The rate of improvement in
clinical symptom in both group had no relationship with sex, education, psychiatric medications,
occupation, cigarette smoking and the number offamily members, But significant improvement in
symptoms was seen in control group patients aged less than 39 years old) P<O,OI). Side effects
associated with drugs was higher in the treatment group (P<0,05),
Conclusion: The findings from this study suggest that eradication of H pylori in treatment of
NUD is a useful measure in the treatment of patients suffering NUD with positive H pylori
