Objective: The most common presentation of severe hemophilia is the hemarthrosis that can
lead to severe and permanent morbidities. This study was performed to assess the condition of
joints of Hemophilic patients who routinely refer to our Shafa's hospital and to determine the
amount of factor 8 consumption over one year in relation to age, severity of their disease and
degree of joint involvement. In addition, to compare of these findings with similar studies in
other countries.
Subjects and Methods: In this study, hemophilic patients were visited and examined for the
number of involved joints and their severity of arthropaty on Gilbert's scale. The amount of
factor 8 consumption for each patient was computed from their record. Clinical findings from
patients' examination and their records were processed for obtaining the frequency tables for
their age, type and severity of hemophilia and also for number and severity of joints
involvement and mean annual factor consumption.
Results: A total of 138 cases were assessed in this study (mean age 21.8 years), 112 of these
cases (81 %) had type A, 26 cases (19%) type B hemophilia. In terms of severity of the
disease 97 case (70%) were severe, 26 cases (19%) moderate and 15 cases (11%) had mild
form of the disease. The mean of the number of joint involvement was 3.43 and the mean of
physical examination of joints on Gilbert's scale was 14.6, and for severe form this was 17.9.
Knee was the most involved joint (113 case). The mean of factor 8 consumed over one year
for type A was 38770 IU and for type B was 23562 IU.
Conclusion: The mean Gilbert's scale was higher than reported in similar studies in France
and Spain. However, the mean factor consumption over year was lower. The finding of this
study suggests that the control of Hemarthrosis as well as its out come in our patients is not
good. Lacking a proper prophylactic or curative policy for these patients can lead to a huge
economic burden for our health system.
