Streptococcus suis diseases in pigs, most importantly meningitis, are worldwide responsible for major economic losses in the pig industry. About one fourth of invasive S. suis diseases are caused by S. suis serotype 9 strains in Europe. However, little is known about serotype 9 since most studies were performed with serotype 2. The objective of this study was to determine the immunogenicity and protective efficacy of a serotype 9 bacterin in piglets. Challenge was conducted with a reference serotype 9 strain, belonging to the same clonal complex but to a different sequence type as the bacterin strain. The bacterin induced protection against mortality but not morbidity. Eleven days post infection, 3 of 7 vaccinated survivors were not fully convalescent and had not eliminated the challenge strain from inner organs completely. In accordance with the clinical findings, the majority of piglets showed fibrinous–suppurative lesions in at least one inner organ or tissue. In contrast to the placebo group such lesions were not detected in one third of bacterin-vaccinated piglets. Determination of specific serum IgG titers revealed that the bacterin elicited seroconversion against muramidase-released protein and basic membrane lipoprotein. Furthermore, vaccination was associated with induction of opsonizing antibodies against the serotype 9 challenge strain. However, titers of opsonizing antibodies were rather low in comparison to those found in our previous serotype 2 vaccination trial. Piglets developed substantially higher titers of opsonizing antibodies after challenge. Opsonizing antibodies were absorbable with the serotype 9 challenge strain but not with an unencapsulated isogenic mutant of a serotype 2 strain indicating their specificity. The results indicate that a serotype 9 bacterin is less protective than a serotype 2 bacterin, most likely due to inducing only low titers of opsonizing antibodies. This might contribute to emergence of serotype 9 strains, in particular strains of this clonal complex, in Europe.
