Limited information has been published on the wild boar immune response against bovine tuberculosis (bTB) and the immunopathogenesis of the pathological hallmark (granuloma) in this species.

in objectives of this study were, on the one hand, to characterize the histopathological features (number of acid-fast bacilli (AFB) and multinucleated giant cells (MNGCs) and the immunohistochemical distribution of different cell subsets (CD3+, CD79a+ and MAC387 + ) and chemical mediators (iNOS and IFN-γ) in the different developmental stages of granulomas produced by the natural infection of Mycobacterium bovis (M. bovis) in wild boar. On the other hand, the study also aimed to analyze the mechanisms underlying the marked differences in the typical lesional patterns observed in M. bovis infections of wild boar (contained, not generalized) and those previously described in fallow deer (poorly contained, generalized).

jority of granulomas analyzed (95.3%) did not show any AFB with the ZN stain and a low number of MNGCs were identified in the different granuloma stages. The immunohistochemical analysis showed that MAC387 was the only immune marker that produced decreasing positivity by granuloma stage, being statistically significantly lower in stages III and IV when compared to stage I and II. Immune markers for lymphocyte cells (CD3 and CD79a) showed a slight rise in the positivity (which was not statistically significant) in the advanced granuloma stages. In keeping with the presence of large numbers of T cells and macrophages, there was a consistently high level of expression of IFN-γ at all stages of granuloma development without a statistical significant decrease in advanced stages. Also related with the higher presence of macrophages in stage I and II, the expression of iNOS was higher in early stages and sustained until stage III, showing a non statistical significant decrease in stage IV. The macrophage and iNOS activity are more intense and sustained along the granuloma development than those described in fallow deer.

histochemical protocols with a panel of markers for wild boar different cells subsets (CD3+, CD79a+ and MAC387 + ) and chemical mediators (iNOS and IFN-γ), and their use to further investigate the immune response in this species are provided.
