The objective of the study was to evaluate the performance of three different aquatic macrophytes for treatment
of municipal wastewater collected from Taxila (Pakistan). A physical model of treatment plant was constructed and
was operated for six experimental runs with each species of macrophyte. Every experimental run consist of thirty
days period. Regular monitoring of influent and effluent concentrations were made during each experimental run.
For the treatment locally available macrophyte species i.e. water hyacinth, duckweed & water lettuce were selected
to use. To evaluate the treatment performance of each macrophyte, BOD5, COD, and Nutrients (Nitrogen and
Phosphorus) were monitored in effluent from model at different detention time of every experimental run after
ensuring steady state conditions. The average reduction of effluent value of each parameter using water hyacinth
were 50.61% for BOD5, 46.38% for COD, 40.34% for Nitrogen and 18.76% for Phosphorus. For duckweed the average
removal efficiency for selected parameters were 33.43% for BOD5, 26.37% for COD, 17.59% for Nitrogen and 15.25%
for Phosphorus and for Water Lettuce the average removal efficiency were 33.43% for BOD5, 26.37% for COD,
17.59% for Nitrogen and 15.25% for Phosphorus. The mechanisms of pollutant removal in this system include
both aerobic and anaerobic microbiological conversions, sorption, sedimentation, volatilization and chemical
transformations. The rapid growth of the biomass was measured within first ten days detention time. It was also
observed that performance of macrophytes is influenced by variation of pH and Temperature. A pH of 6-9 and
Temperature of 15-38°C is most favorable for treatment of wastewater by macrophytes. The option of macrophytes
for treatment of Municipal sewage under local environmental conditions can be explored by further verifying the
removal efficiency under variation of different environmental conditions. Also this is need of time that macrophyte
system should be used for treatment of wastewater because their performance is comparable to conventional
wastewater treatment plants and also the system has very low O&M costs.
