As far as waste is concerned, industry has a two fold position: on the one hand industry produces waste during the production processes and on the other hand most of the industrial products become waste after being used. From environment perspective waste management and minimization at the source has become important issue all over the world. Waste minimization leading to cleaner production is the process and the policy of reducing the amount of waste produced by Industry at the source and remaining should be managed.The core objective of this research paper is to examine the impact of waste minimization, waste management and the planning of effective waste utilization that increases organizations profitability and green image. The case study will present the Recycle, Reuse, Reduce strategy that waste management is not only necessary to keep the environment healthy but it also brings the financial savings to the organization. It is obvious that there is significant relationship between waste management and profitability. Attock Refinery Limited (ARL) has done significant work in the field of industrial waste management. The stratified sampling has also used during a survey to gather primary data i.e. congregated by administering questionnaires to employees of different departments that shows positive attitude towards waste minimization and management. The interventions regarding industrial waste management are in full practice at ARL to meet the National Environmental Quality Standards. In 1993, prominent step has been taken to address the environmental issues and waste management. After carrying out the detailed survey of effluent waste water system during 1995-1996, Effluent Treatment Plants were installed to meet the NEQS. Keeping the continuity of efforts “Zero Discharge” of effluent waste from the refinery was targeted. This project is recycling the waste water resulting environment conservation and saving money that was being spent for water pumping from remote sources and in storage facilities. The implementation has been planned in different phases to achieve the goal. In first phase cooling towers blow down water (96,000 liters/day) and drinking water treatment plants back wash water is being recycled and used for fire water, washing the plants area floors and gardening purposes. The work is in progress to recycle and reuse all refinery waste water. Bioremediation is being carried out of oily sludge recovered during the cleaning of the crude oil and products storage tanks. It is the safest technique in the world for such type of hazardous waste. The above technique is also being implemented for crude oil / product spillage during transportation. The waste from refinery and hospital is being incinerated in three stage incinerator meeting NEQS and minimizing impact on the environment. It is concluded that proper management of all type of wastes, implementing cleaner production techniques to minimize waste at the source contributes not only to protect the environment but also increases the profitability and meet corporate social responsibility.
