The Effective Elements on the Quality Improvement of long Term (persue studies) in- service courses for Primary Teachers. Thus, the following research tends to specify the effective factors that help in the improvement of long term OJT classes from the view point of teachers, managers, instructors, and experts. The researcher seeks to assure the following questions: 1-What effective factors contribute to the improvement of long term OJT courses? 2-What indicators do each one of factors has? 3-What are the differences among the views of teachers, managers, instructors and experts regarding the factors and their indicators? To carry out this research a sample of 600 teachers, managers, instructors and experts were randomly selected. A questionnaire consisting of 86 items were developed and distributed among the sample. About 537 questionnaires were completed and analyzed. The Cora Bach's Alpha coefficient that was for a collection of 86 items as equal to 986. To analyze the data, the one -way variance analysis was used in order to answer the third question. The present research method is developed in term of objective and quantities in view of data and cross-sectional from quality point of view. The sufficient amount of sampling (KMO) as equal to 0.971 and the significance of Kroit Barlett characteristics indicated the availability to a good condition to implement one-way variance analysis. Based on an analytical approach for the main rotating components by using Varimax method and given matrix, Scray's diagram and the percentage of appointed variance, only 6 factors out of 86 series of it were extracted. These six factors altogether cover totally 61.4% of the whole variances of variable the first factor of which shares 21 questions. The special value accounts for 39.587% of total variance that belong to variables. A simple structure of factors has produced these results. The first factor of with its 21 clauses represents the effects that budget and time have, with a mean value of 39.587. The second factor with its 22 clauses the training contents with mean value of 4.780. The third factor with mean value of 3.174.The forth factor with its 15 clauses the stimulation and effort of a student with a mean value of 1.911. The fifth factor with 10 clauses the training environment with a mean value of 1.701 and the six factors with its three clauses the management and leadership of training courses with a mean value of 1.659. Lastly, one-way variance test was used in this study to compare the opinions expressed by the four groups who participated in it. The result showed that there is a significant differences between opinions expressed by third group (the teachers) and those expressed by first and forth group (teachers and experts). The total average of third more than average of all other groups.
