The main objective of this research was to compare the university students' educational success who had consecution in their field of study at M.S. level with those who hadn't.This research was done by descriptive survey method. The population included all university students at M.S. level in different fields and also their instructors in Tehran public universities. A sample of 170 instructors and 270 students were selected by stratified random sampling method. Two closed response questionnaires were used; one of them was used for instructors and the second one for M.S. students. The results showed: 1- The human science instructors evaluated the satisfaction of M.S. Students without consecution more than other students. Those instructors who disagreed with changing students field of study at M.S. level evaluated lower chance of students occupation and satisfaction. 2- Instructors who disagreed with changing students' field of study at M.S. level declared more negative view towards changing field of study. Human science instructors predicted more success for students who changed their field of study . 3- Instructors who were agree with changing student's fields declared more comprehensiveness for students without consecution. 4- Instructors didn't emphasized on the materiality motivations in terms of decision to change field of study at M.S. level. 5- From student's point of view, The rate of satisfaction from field of study in B.S. didn't influenced on changing it at M.S. level, but the rate of interest towards their field of study at M.S. was significant factor which influenced changing field of study. 6- Since students who had consecution in their field of study had more faild scores, students without consecution were more successful. 7- From student's point of view, selecting the field of study at M.S. level in students with consecution was related to social welfare motives in present and future, while selecting field of study in students without consecution was related to factors such as, future job selection, welfare, income and economic values. 
