Background and Objective: The impact of clinical environment training is more than theoretical training curriculum, and the students do what the teachers do, not what the teachers say, so According to the role modeling of the teacher in transferring the professional features, the howness of teacher's interaction in the clinical environments, observed from the view points of the medical students, is a valuable subject for studying. Then this study investigates and classifies five dimensions of teacher's interactions in clinical curriculum from the view points of the medical students. Method: The method of study is descriptive, surveying type. The population was all the stagers and interns of Shahed University, in the academic year 1391-2 (N=175), out of which, and with recourse to Krjsy and Morgan table, 123 sample were selected. The research instrument was researcher-make questionnaire on the interactive dimensions assessment of medical teachers. The form and content validity of the device was met and the coefficient Cronbach's alpha was 0/95.
Results: The less-than-half average of teacher's interactions with students (2/63) and the more-than-half average of his interactions with patients (3/29) in clinical curriculum were significant. But the average of howness of teacher's interactions with colleague (3/16), with people (2/95) and with himself (3/00) was not significant. The Inferential test, presented average ranking of teacher's interaction was as such: teacher's interactions with patient (3/72), with the colleage (3/44), with himself (3/18), with people (2/71) and finally with students (1/95) (P?0/05).
Conclusion: The necessity of improving the knowledge and practical skill of medical teacher especially with his student and with people, with himself and with colleague signifies the pure attention of the teacher being focused on an acceptable interaction with patient in Clinical educational environments. The less-than-average interation with student could, undesireably, result of unsuitable education of the teachers to the clinical students.

