Background and Aim: The use of medicinal herbs is taken as a healthy and effective  alternative treatment for hyperglycemia and liver toxicity. Therefore, due to the positive effects of exercise training on diabetic patients, the objective of the present study was to investigate the effect of a 6 week period of aerobic training together with Pistacia atlantica extract taking on protein carbonyl (PC), heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) , and glycogen levels in the liver tissues of diabetic rats. 
Materials and Methods:  In this experimental research, 40 male Wistar rats were randomly divided into 5 groups: 1) healthy control, 2) diabetic control, 3) diabetic under aerobic training, 4) diabetics  receiving Pistacia atlantica extract and 5) diabetics under aerobic training and receiving the extract. .The six week period exercise program included  aerobic training on a treadmill (5 sessions per week, 40 minutes per each session, with a speed of 20m/min and 5% incline). Pistacia atlantica extract was fed 5 days per week (25mg/kg). The rats were anesthetized.48 hours after the last training session, and their livers were isolated. Then, the level of their PC, HSP70, and hepatic glycogen were assessed by means of ELISA and chemical colorometry.
Results:  Mean level of PC in the diabetic group under aerobic training, diabetic group receiving pistacia extract, and the group under aerobic training together with receiving  pistacia extract  was significantly lower than that of the control diabetic group (P was 0.002,0.006 and 0.002, respectively); but, mean level of PC was not significantly different in the three case groups. Mean level of HSP70 and glycogen in the three groups was not significantly different either (P was 0.21 and 0.59 ,respectively).
Conclusion: It was found that aerobic training and Pistacia atlantica extract  consumption, either alone or together, led to a significant reduction in PC levels in the liver tissues of diabetic rats. Thus, Pistacia atlantica extract and aerobic training can be  good remedies in reducing liver complications resulting from diabetes.

