Background: Retinoids have been suggested to play a role in oogenesis and oocyte survival.
Objective: In the present study the effects of ret inol palmitate were inves tigat d on di fferent ial
follicular counts in respon se to superovulation as well as follicle qua lity after vitrifica tion of ovaries.
Materials and Methods: Ten, 4 week old female BALB/c mice were randomly as igned to eithe r
paraffin (n=5) or retinol palmitate (n=5) administration . Vitamin A admin istered animals received
(i.p .) 250 IV retinol palmitate, dissolved in 0.1 ml of paraffin oil on days one and ten followed by
superovulation with 10 IU PMSG. Paraffin administered mice were only treated with 0.1 ml of
paratfin oil. The collected left ovarie s from both paraffin and vitamin A administered groups were
considered as non-vitrified and the collected right ovaries from both treated gro ups underwent
vitr ification. Ovarie s in the vitrified group were frozen sequentially by placing into two vitrification
solutions {VS 1: 10% ethylene glycol (EG), 10% DMSO in holding medium (TCM- 199 + 20% FBS:
HM) and YS2: 20% EG, 20% DMSO in HM}. After warming, recovered ovaries as well as nonvitrified
ovaries were serially sectioned and examined histopathological ly.
Results: The proportion of antral follicles in the non-vitrified ovaries from vitamin A adm inistered
mice was statistically higher than the non-vitri fied ovaries from paraffin admi nistered group (29.4%
vs. 15.6%, respectively; p<O.OO 1). No difference due to ret inol palmitate injection was observed for
the rate of small foll icles between the two non-vitrified groups. The percentage of damaged foll icles
did not show any significant differences between the two vitrified groups (76% vs. 79%).
Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that administration of retinol palmitate may improve the
response to superovulation through the shift of follicular growth towards antral folli cle development.
However, no positive effect of retinol palmitate in the quality of follicl es is probable when ovaries
are vitrified.

