Wetland vegetation is a core component of wetland ecosystems. Wetland vegetation structural parameters, such as height and leaf area index (LAI) are important variables required by earth-system and ecosystem models. Therefore, rapid, accurate, objective and quantitative estimations of wetland vegetation structural parameters are essential. The airborne laser scanning (also called LiDAR) is an active remote sensing technology and can provide accurate vertical vegetation structural parameters, but its accuracy is limited by short, dense vegetation canopies that are typical of wetland environments. The objective of this research is to explore the potential of estimating height and LAI for short wetland vegetation using airborne discrete-return LiDAR data.

curacies of raw laser points and LiDAR-derived digital elevation models (DEM) data were assessed using field GPS measured ground elevations. The results demonstrated very high accuracy of 0.09 m in raw laser points and the root mean squared error (RMSE) of the LiDAR-derived DEM was 0.15 m.

tion canopy height was estimated from LiDAR data using a canopy height model (CHM) and regression analysis between field-measured vegetation heights and the standard deviation (σ) of detrended LiDAR heights. The results showed that the actual height of short wetland vegetation could not be accurately estimated using the raster CHM vegetation height. However, a strong relationship was observed between the σ and the field-measured height of short wetland vegetation and the highest correlation occurred (R2 = 0.85, RMSE = 0.14 m) when sample radius was 1.50 m. The accuracy assessment of the best-constructed vegetation height prediction model was conducted using 25 samples that were not used in the regression analysis and the results indicated that the model was reliable and accurate (R2 = 0.84, RMSE = 0.14 m).

d vegetation LAI was estimated using laser penetration index (LPI) and LiDAR-predicted vegetation height. The results showed that the vegetation height-based predictive model (R2 = 0.79) was more accurate than the LPI-based model (the highest R2 was 0.70). Moreover, the LAI predictive model based on vegetation height was validated using the leave-one-out cross-validation method and the results showed that the LAI predictive model had a good generalization capability. Overall, the results from this study indicate that LiDAR has a great potential to estimate plant height and LAI for short wetland vegetation.
