Iranians have recently showed a rapid nutritional transition toward a more sedentary lifestyle and unhealthy dietary practices, these changes being more obvious in younger adults. Limited information however
exists on different sub-elasses. The main objective of this study was to evaluate the obesity prevalence and its lifestyle related behaviors in all female personnel working in administrative positions at Ahvaz Jundi-Shahpour University, Iran.
Materials and Methods: In this cross-sectional study, all 101 female staff of the university, aged 2045y, were interviewed and data on their food frequency, physical activity, drug and medical histories, was documented and anthropometric questionnaires were also completed and scored. Data collection was carried out during spring 2005. Percent of body fat was measured using the bioelectrical impedance
analysis (BIA) method.
Results: Based on the BIA method, overweight and obesity rates were determined in 34.6 and 40.6 percent of women, respectively, and central obesity was prevalent in 27% of them. Women with bachelor degrees
had less body fat percentage and body mass index (BMI) than those with lower degrees (31.8±5.6 vs 35.5±5.8 percent; p<0.002 and 25.5±3.9 vs 28.5±4.5 kg/m2; p<0.003). About 300/0 of the subjects ate biscuits
and dates during working hours as snacks.
Moreover, except for breads, the score of consuming other food groups based on food guide pyramid was low. The higher vegetable oil intake, the higher the body fat percentage (p<0.05). There were no rela-tionships between consumption of other food groups with anthropometric and clinical parameters.
However, 83% of individuals did not engage in either daily of weekly physical activity programs. Repeated weight loss programs were associated with increase in body fat percentage (p<0.05).
Conclusion: Obesity and overweight rates are highly prevalent in female university staff, and the higher educational levels are associated with less body fat percentage. High-ealorie snacks and sedentary lifestyle
seem to be the main reasons of gaining weight in women working in administrative jobs; they need to control their snacks and to include more physical activity programs in their daily schedules.
