Increasing urbanization has created many problems and the administration and management of cities are faced with new challenges. These problems in third world countries are higher. Most of these problems are related to the political structure of the country. Therefore, citizen participation in urban governance in these countries is more necessary. The United Nations Human Settlements Programme of Action has strategies for achieving shelter for all, and has also proposed a move for the proper management and sustainable development of cities. These guidelines, approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations at the end of the twentieth century, have been set and implemented. Political systems can be centralized or decentralized. Generally, a non-centralized political and spatial system has more credibility amongst people. For this reason, local governments are one of the most important indicators of political and spatial distribution of power. Good governance also emphasizes decentralized political and spatial structure. In contemporary Iran, the concept of good governance and urban literature is abundant, but less attention is given to implementation of the legal field. Good governance is defined as the participative process in public affairs and where there is participation of the public sector, the private sector, and the government. It is argued that good governance is very essential for the management of urban development. However, little attention is being paid to the principles and potentials of the relevant laws in this area. This study aims to emphasize the role of good governance in the formulation of Iran’s and Tehran’s urban development laws and regulations. The major objective of this study is to identify and explain the degree of conformity between Tehran’s and Iran’s urban development laws and regulations with the principles of good urban governance. This study is explorative, descriptive and applicative in nature. The main sources that were used to collect the data required for this research include:
1. Organizational Law and Islamic Council's Mayoral Elections
2. Municipalities Law
3. Municipal Finance Law
4. Strategic-Structural Plan (Master Plan) of Tehran
5. Tehran landscape blueprints
6. Strategic plan of Tehran's Council
7. Medium-term action plans of Tehran Municipality
8. Long-term action plan of Tehran Municipality
9. Framework and approaches of Medium-term Action Plan of Tehran Municipality
10. Strategies for the implementation of the mandate Tehran Municipality
11. Budget of Tehran Municipality
 
This study employed the Delphi method in order to conform the content of Tehran’s and Iran’s urban development laws and regulations to urban good governance principles. This study suggests that there is a relative orientation between those two issues. The rules of urban development of Tehran city conform and relate with the principles of good governance in 250 cases. The principles of ‘accountability’, municipal development laws, guidelines, and Tehran’s Municipality budget are the most accommodating. In addition, all of the contents of this research are the principles of good governance for cities. The regulations adopted by the City Council of Tehran Municipality have greater compliance with the principles of good governance. However, this direction has been developed with the aim of achieving access to good governance and urban planning. Thus, if these rules are implemented correctly, they can have an important role in promoting good governance in the city. This issue requires further research in order to expand this field.
