The junctions between newly developed biodegradable conducting polymers (polylactide-polypyrrole PLLA-PPy and polycaprolactone-polypyrrole PCL-PPy) and metal electrodes (Au, Au/Cu, Ag, Ag/Cu, Cu, Cr/Au/Cu, Pd/Au/Cu, Pt/Au/Cu) were studied. The objective was to determine the composite/metal combination having the lowest possible contact resistance and ohmic characteristics. In a first step, different surface treatments, adhesion and metal layers were tested in order to evaluate the contact resistance. Then the current–voltage (IV) characteristics were measured and both ohmic and rectifying behaviour were observed depending on the polymer/metal junctions investigated. The surface treatments studied included an argon sputtering step and a grinding of the polymer surface with the objective of improving the contact between the metal electrode and the polymer. It was found that the most favourable conditions resulted from a process flow without argon sputtering, without grinding for PLLA-PPy and with a slight grinding for PCL-PPy. Moreover the most favourable metal electrodes for PLLA-PPy were Pd/Au/Cu, while the best compromise for PCL-PPy was to use Au/Cu. For the rectifying polymer/metal junctions, the standard thermionic emission model modified with a series resistance was successfully applied to the measured current–voltage IV characteristics. The saturation current density J0, series resistance R, ideality diode factor n and barrier height φB were investigated. The Chot functions were computed for each rectifying junction and the corresponding threshold voltages were calculated. Finally the conductivity of both composites was evaluated as a function of temperature in the range of 30 °C to 80 °C. For PLLA-PPy a decrease of the resistivity was observed when the temperature was increasing, while no clearly recognisable pattern was identified for PCL-PPy in this temperature range. The electrical conductivity of the PLLA-PPy samples was found to follow the empirical Arrhenius model, and the difference between the Fermi energy EF and the mobility edge EC | EF - EC | as well as the conductivity at the mobility edge σC were evaluated. Moreover the electrical conductivity of the PLLA-PPy samples was found to follow the Mott variable range hopping (VRH) model, and the high temperature limit of conductivity σ1 as well as the Mott characteristic temperature T1 were calculated.
