Abstract
Introduction: Pre-hospital emergency is a part of health systems and equipped ambulances is necessary to provide appropriate services in this sector. Despite the high prevalence of road traffic injuries in Iran and importance of the quality of intervention, few studies have been conducted in this field. This study aimed to compare the ambulances medical equipments of emergency ambulances in Guilan province with national standards.
Objective: To assess the quality of pre-hospital emergency providing services in Guilan based on national standards.
Materials and Methods: This study is a descriptive-analytical and functional study that was performed in Guilan in 2013. The samples consisted of 71 active ambulance of emergency medical services. Data collection tools included the standard medical examination card checklist of B type ambulances of Ministry of Health and  Checklist of 4374 of rescue vehicles and equipment of  the National Iranian Standard Organization. The checklists have been completed by observation of the medical equipment existing in all emergency medical services ambulances by researchers. Also, response time (for an emergency vehicle to arrive on scene) was recorded. Data were analyzed using descriptive and inferential statistics
Results: Overall, average medical equipment, according to standards of health ministry and Iran’s Standard National organization, were 55 and 53%, respectively, indicating a significant difference with standards (p < 0.05). Also, the average equipment rates according to the two standards were as follows: equipment of respiration/ventilation, 94.6 and 93.7%, injection/drugs: 74.2 and 59.4%, equipment of treatment-critical management 31 and 30%, respectively, showing a significant difference with Iran’s defined standards in all cases (p < 0.05). Also, response time in cities and roads was in compliance with standard of Ministry of health
Conclusion: Since the deficiency of medical equipment of ambulances will reduce the efficiency of emergency medical services, it seems that more effective measures should be taken to meet the established national standards. 
Conflict of interest: non declared

