Abstract 
Introduction: Traditional medicine is a set of skills and knowledge and practice  based on theories and experiences indigenous to different cultures used for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of mental and physical diseases. Given the differences in attitudes and demographic characteristics of the population in traditional medicine, guiding public opinion toward this kind of practice is important. 
Objective: To determine the demographic characteristics and attitudes about traditional medicine among patients in Ghaem clinics in Rasht, northern Iran.
Materials and Methods: This study was a descriptive cross - sectional study on 132 patients in Ghaem clinics in Rasht that is specialist center for  some traditional medications (i.e., bloodletting, leeches and bloodletting therapy) .The study was performed during the first quarter of 2013.Convenience sampling and the reasercher questionnaire consisting of 33 items with 5 option Likert scale were used to collect data. Cronbach's alpha reliability coefficient was calculated 88.Content validity was confirmed by the university teachers. Statistical analyses including descriptive statistics and analysis Kolmogorov Asprynf test, Mann-Whitney and Kruskal-Wallis tests were performed using the spss software  version 21.
Results: The most frequent reason of patients referred to the clinic was their rheumatic and joint pains(25/8)%, headache(18/5%)and sinusitis and Hypertension(8/9%). Their knowledge of  traditional medicine and health benefits were from reading books and internet(40.2 %),the experiences of others(36.5%),newspapers, television and the mass media(1.5%) ,and friends’ recommendations (29%). In general, a positive attitude towards the traditional medicine was observed with a mean score of approximately (3/9) of 5criteria. Most clients asked for better promotion of traditional medicine on TV and radio, and arranging training classes. Also, 70% of clients say that lower expenses, better treatment with no uncomplications and shorter treatment course were  the main reasons that they consult the traditional centers. Conclusion: The Ministry of Health and policymakers should inform, and supervise the centers offering traditional medicine, to pave the way for the popularity of this precious medical legacy. The inclusion of courses in medical and pharmaceutical fields is highly desirable for this end. Also, the more publicity through the mass media, especially television, and short term courses can be useful in this context.

