Fusarium proliferatum is a common pathogen able to infect a broad range of agriculturally important crops. Recently, some evidence for genetic variance among the species genotypes in relation to their plant origin has been reported. Mycotoxin contamination of plant tissues is the most important threat caused by F. proliferatum and fumonisins B (FBs) are the principal mycotoxins synthesized. The toxigenic potential of the pathogen genotypes is variable and also the reaction of different host plant species on the infection by pathogen is different. The objective of present study was to evaluate the impact of the extracts on the growth and fumonisin biosynthesis by 32 F. proliferatum strains originating from different host species (A—asparagus, M—maize, G—garlic, PS—pea and P—pineapple), and how it changes the secondary metabolism measured by fumonisin biosynthesis.

erage strain dry weight was 65.2 mg for control conditions and it reached 180.7 mg, 100.5 mg, 76.6 mg, 126.2 mg and 51.1 mg when pineapple, asparagus, maize, garlic and pea extracts were added, respectively. In the second experiment the extracts were added after 5 days of culturing of the representative group of strains, displaying diverse reaction to the extract presence. Also, the influence of stationary vs. shaken culture was examined. Mean biomass amounts for shaken cultures of 15 chosen strains were as follows: 37.4 mg of dry weight for control culture (C), 219.6 mg (P), 113 mg (A), 93.6 mg (M), 62 mg (G) and 48 mg (PS), respectively. For stationary cultures, the means were as follows: C—57.4 mg, P—355.6 mg, A—291.6 mg, M—191.1 mg, G—171.1 mg and PS—58.9 mg. Few strains showed differential growth when stationary/shaken culture conditions were applied.

 all strains synthesized moderate amounts of fumonisins in control conditions—less than 10 ng/μL, regardless of the origin and host species. Few strains were able to produce over 100 ng/μL of FBs when pineapple extract was added, twelve strains synthesized more than 10 ng/μL under asparagus extract induction and the pea extract was the most efficient inhibitor of fumonisin biosynthesis. The general impact of the extracts on the fungal biomass amounts was similar, regardless of the host plant origin of the fungal genotypes studied. The evaluation of FBs content has shown differential reaction of some strains, which may contribute to their aggressiveness and pathogenicity.
