Abstract
Background and objective: Many parental styles cause different behaviors among children and adolescents. The aim of this study is to determine the relationship between parental styles of mothers and the level of social anxiety in children and its components among boys and girls of fourth and fifth grade in Karaj.
Method: This is a descriptive study and the sample was included 400 students (boys and girls) and also their mothers. Data was gathered by using two questionnaires of Diana Baumrind parental styles and Leibowitz Social Anxiety Scale for children and adolescents (LSAS-CA). Data was analyzed by using descriptive statistic and inferential statistic methods (T-tests for independent groups, Pearson correlation and step by step regression analysis were used). 
Findings: Authoritarian, permissive and forcefulness  parental styles at the level (p <  0/10) with social anxiety (total score) and also components of anxiety performance, avoid performance, social anxiety and avoid social had significant relationship which permissive and forcefulness  parental styles were associated with reduction of social anxiety in children. The authoritarian parenting style was associated with increased social anxiety in children. Mothers apply permissive style for boys and authoritarian style for girls which it demonstrates that girls have more social anxiety than boys.
Conclusion: Lack of proper parenting will be followed by many social and psychological problems and the mother’s role has the special importance. Mother as the prominent role that plays in the child’s life, can provide an appropriate context for self-knowing of the child that it helps them to develop their cognitive schemas, reach to a positive and a proper understanding of themselves and their environment, can get desirable social relations and  through these, can play a significant role in reducing social anxiety.
Keywords: Maternal Parenting, Authoritative Parenting, Forcefulness  Parenting, Permissive Parenting, Social Anxiety, Karaj. 

