Background/Objective: Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (HPS) is the commonest indication of
pediatric surgery in neonatal period and early infancy. There are some clinical and radiological
methods for the diagnosis of HPS. As an example, a positive “olive sign” in the abdominal
examination is diagnostic; however, it seems that performing physical examination for the
detection of this sign has been abandoned and that this practice has been replaced by sonography
and other paraclinical tests. The aim of this study was to assess the ability of our
physicians in finding the palpable olive in clinical examination and the accuracy of sonography
and the true positive rate of barium study.
Patients and Methods: We evaluated 84 patients admitted to our hospital during a 7-year
period in which the final surgical report was HPS. Clinical examination for the right upper
quadrant (RUQ) olive like mass, barium study and ultrasound findings of HPS were evaluated.
Pediatric residents (junior and senior residents) examined all these cases. Twenty-one patients
had a barium study and 81 had a sonography, which was performed by an attending
radiologist. Data were evaluated for the diagnostic yield (DY) of all these diagnostic tools.
Results: The mean age of the patients was 36.1 days on admission and the male/female ratio
was 5.4/1. All the patients had a clinical examination, in which the olive sign was detected in
only 13 cases (DY= 15.5%, 95% CI: 12%–19%); 81 patients had a sonography, in 71 of whom HPS
was detected (DY = 87.7%, 95% CI: 85%–92%); barium study revealed HPS in 16 of 21 patients
(DY = 76.2%, 95% CI: 71.4%–82%).
Conclusion: Sonography was more precise than clinical examination and barium study in detecting
HPS. Due to the crying baby and the distended stomach, less time is spent for clinical
examination. Therefore, paraclinical studies such as imaging become the first step in diagnosis
and are requested earlier and even as the first diagnostic study on admission. This leads
to reduction of doctors’ experience in finding the olive sign.

