The main objective of this study was to determine the effects of the moisture content, loading
velocity and compression position on the force, specific deformation, absorbed energy and required power to
achieve the initial rupture of the walnut shell. Iran is the third walnut producing country in the world. Separation
of walnut kernel from the shell is a very time consuming and costly task. A proper cracking machine for walnut
has not yet been manufactured. It seems that the determination of mechanical properties of different walnut
varieties is the pre-requisite step for this pwpose. Thus, 108 local walnut samples, (a local cultivar) obtained
from the seedling trees of Urmia district, with almost equal dimensions were selected. These samples were
compression loaded by an Instron test machine until the shell rupture was initiated. During this experiment,
rupture force, specific deformation, required energy and power for shell rupture, in 9,21 and 27% (w.b.) walnut
moisture levels, 50, 200 and 500 mm min-l loading velocities and at 3 major compression directions namely,
length (X), suture (Z) and width (Y), were determined. The results of this experiment indicated tha~ the highest
force, energy and power values, required for walnut rupture, occur when the force is applied at the length
direction of the fruit and the lowest of these values were required at either width or suture line. Specific
deformation of walnut shell increased with increasing loading velocity, regardless of its moisture content and
loading direction. Furthermore, moisture content of walnut shell increased the specific deformation for 21%
moisture, but did not cause further changes at the higher level of 27% of moisture. However, the strain values
(specific deformation) appeared to be the same at all loading position. Increasing the loading velocity, although
increased the required rupture energy and power, but reduced the fracture force. Furthermore, in higher loading
velocities (about 500 mm min-I), the specific deformation increased which indicates more flexibility in walnut
shell. Flexible shell may protect the fruit against fracture in the walnut cracking process.

