System dynamics approach by simulating a bargaining process can be used for resolving conflict of
interests in water quality management. This approach can be a powerful alternative for traditional
approaches for conflict resolution, which often rely on classical game theory. Waste load allocation models
for river water quality management determine the optimal monthly waste load allocation to each point
load. Most of these approaches are based on the multi-objective optimization models and do not consider
the existing conflicts. In this study, a system dynamics-based conflict resolution model is presented for
monthly waste load allocation in river systems. In this model, the stakeholders and decision-makers
negotiate with each other considering their relative authorities, aspirations and dissatisfactions. System
dynamics approach is actually used for simulating the bargaining process among the players. The model
incorporates the objectives and preferences of stakeholders and decision-makers of the system in the form
of utility functions and could provide a final agreement among the players. To evaluate the spatial and
temporal variation of the concentration of the water quality indicator in the system, a water quality
simulation model is also linked to the conflict resolution model. In the proposed model, a pre-assigned
utility is allocated to different water users and the results are evaluated using a simulation model. The
allocated utilities are tested and adjusted in order to provide an agreement between the assumed utilities
and the utilities assigned by the model. The proposed model is applied to the Karkheh River system
located in the southwest of Iran. The results show that the model can effectively incorporate the
preferences of the players in providing a final agreement and the runtime of the proposed model is much
less than the classical conflict resolution models. It is also shown that the waste load allocation can
significantly reduce number and duration of the periods in which the river water quality violates the
standards.

