Introduction:
Current trend regarding tourism spatial development both at macro and micro regional level, following the county spatial development structure is relatively chaotic. There exist an imbalance with respect to access to different opportunities as well as resources and benefits. The consequences of this disorder is exemplified itself in low performance of peripheral tourism destinations as opposed to tourism poles. This in turn, will lead to concentration of growth in prominent tourism destinations and lagging behind peripheral ones. These gaps and spatial discrepancies associated with passing problems and challenges from undeveloped spaces into well-developed tourism destinations. Effective utilization of tourism capabilities as well as attaining an appropriate spatial arrangement of tourism destinations, relationships and linkages, having control over growth and development, and achieving sustainable tourism, all demand tourism spatial planning. This not only paves the way for satisfying tourists varied needs in accordance with tourism capabilities at national and regional levels, but also would be very beneficial for host communities as well, taking into consideration the tourism development driving forces. This spatial balance could an affect image formation of destination one could illustrate and cluster different sectors of particular destination via spatial arrangement including nodes, axes and areas. The comprehensive analysis of these spatial arrangements and clustering could lead to location identity and providing a transparent image for destinations. This study predominantly aims to focus on spatial arrangement with emphasis on optimization of the organizational arrangement as well as associated activities and corresponding linkages. The study area that is Torgabeh Shandiz in Khorasan Razavi experiencing spatial disorders and imbalances regarding tourism resource distributions, attractions, products, supportive and logistics services. This study further tries to find the missing links and existing gaps regarding spatial organization of the current tourism destinations stating and propose balanced and integrated pattern at regional level in order to achieve sustainable tourism development in the study area.



Methodology:
Taking into consideration the objective of this study, analytical-descriptive research method were applied. This is followed by documentation as well as field works. The statistical society includes 34 potential and active tourism destinations (2 towns and 32 villages) in Torgabeh Shandiz. Based on relevant literatures three components – “destination potentials”, “destination functions”, and “destination accessibilities” and 8 indexes including “the quality of tourism assets” the quantity of tourism assets, “tourism functions regarding provision of services”, “public services functions”, “accessibilities”, “quality of accessibilities” spatial dimensions “physical situation” were identified. This is followed by application of AHP for determining the magnitude of each yardstick. Final scoring and ranking destinations further demand PROMETHEE technique as well as clustering analysis. It finally supported by fracture point theory through application of GIS.

Conclusion:
This study suggests the existence of four unorganized levels systems in spatial organization of the city. This means, there exist two prime destinations that is Torgabeh and Shandiz. In order to alleviate this case, the application of strategic principles of spatial organization is recommended. This could be done through comparison of the current situation with abstract one and further to modify it in accordance with regional characteristics. The proposed spatial organization of Torgabeh-Shandiz could be help full regarding investments in social-economic infrastructures and provision of complementary – rational and justice relations among different destinations. The proposed spatial organization is based on four hierarchical levels in which the first level corresponds with tourism poles (Torgabeh and Shandiz). The second level is associated with tourism growth centers (Virani, Kang & Azghad). The third level includes (Mayan Vosta, Dehno, Sar asiab, Kelate ahan, Kelate ebrahimkhan & Khanrood). The base of this proposed system is comprised 18 sate lite destinations.

