Purpose: The current paper is intended to assess effective factors of residents’ satisfaction of their quality of living environment from Miandeh rural-ship residents’ view in Fasa County. Accordingly, with regard to conceptual literature of quality of environment, 16 selected factors taken from conceptual framework, have been assessed and evaluated.
Methodology:  In terms of the objective of the research, the method is applied and, in case of the method, it is descriptive-analytic. The sample size was calculated 384 cases for study area using Cochran’s formula. To analyze data, one sample t-test, Spearman correlation coefficient, Phi and Cramer tests have been used. In addition, to complete the analysis, both fuzzy multi-criteria techniques and cluster analysis were used. Generally, the ultimate score of residents’ satisfaction level of their living environment were classified into three classes including: High satisfaction, Medium satisfaction, low satisfaction.
Finding:  The lowest satisfaction rate of residents is corresponded to rural areas such as: Bisheh Zard, Rahim abad, Goharab and Abuzar abad which the obtained satisfaction rate is lower than average. In this case, promotion of access, physical condition of the roads, creation, expansion, anticipated range of leisure facilities in slums, improving rural waste and disposal collection, revitalization the around rural spaces specially in Rahimabad and Bisheh zard could be enumerated as approaches that have been proposed based on the results.
Research limitation: The limitation of the research was about time, financial issues and the attitude of the rural population and the questions related to issues such as social or financial affairs.
Practical implication: The present study has emphasized on the strategy that to create a favorable environment considering environmental potentiality of rural areas a codified program should be developed for the residents which has the characteristics of life satisfaction. Enhancing the environment quality of life in rural areas helps village's stability.
Original/ value: The value of this research is having different look and provided residents views to quality environment life is in rural areas of Iran.

