ments,
such as walking, running and jumping, data collected
across a single cycle might be atypical and potentially unable to
represent an individualپfs generalized performance. The study
described here was designed to determine the number of successive
cycles due to continuous, repetitive countermovement
jumping which a test subject should perform in a single experimental
session to achieve stability of the mean of the corresponding
continuously measured ground reaction force (GRF)
variables. Seven vertical GRF variables (period of jumping
cycle, duration of contact phase, peak force amplitude and its
timing, average rate of force development, average rate of force
relaxation and impulse) were extracted on the cycle-by-cycle
basis from vertical jumping force time histories generated by
twelve participants who were jumping in response to regular
electronic metronome beats in the range 2-2.8 Hz. Stability of
the selected GRF variables across successive jumping cycles
was examined for three jumping rates (2, 2.4 and 2.8 Hz) using
two statistical methods: intra-class correlation (ICC) analysis
and segmental averaging technique (SAT). Results of the ICC
analysis indicated that an average of four successive cycles
(mean 4.5 پ} 2.7 for 2 Hz; 3.9 پ} 2.6 for 2.4 Hz; 3.3 پ} 2.7 for
2.8 Hz) were necessary to achieve maximum ICC values. Except
for jumping period, maximum ICC values took values from
0.592 to 0.991 and all were significantly (p . 0.05) different
from zero. Results of the SAT revealed that an average of ten
successive cycles (mean 10.5 پ} 3.5 for 2 Hz; 9.2 پ} 3.8 for
2.4 Hz; 9.0 پ} 3.9 for 2.8 Hz) were necessary to achieve stability
of the selected parameters using criteria previously reported in
the literature. Using 10 reference trials, the SAT required standard
deviation criterion values of 0.49, 0.41 and 0.55 for 2 Hz,
2.4 Hz and 2.8 Hz jumping rates, respectively, in order to approximate
the ICC results. The results of the study suggest that
the ICC might be a less conservative but more objective method
to evaluate stability of the data. Based on these considerations, it
can be recommended that a force time history due to continuous,
repetitive countermovement jumping should include minimum
of four (the average from the ICC analysis) and possibly as
many as nine successive jumping cycles (the upper limit of the
ICC analysis) to establish stable mean values of the selected
GRF data. This information is important for both experimental
measurements and analytical studies of GRF signals due to
continuous, repetitive countermovement jumping.

