effective communication is essential to the practice of high quality medicine. There are methodological challenges in communication
skills training. There is compelling evidence that experiential methods of communication skills instruction are superior
to more traditionally didactic approach. This study was performed in order to assess the educational benefits of communication
skills training by video feedback method versus traditional format such as lecture on communication skills.
Methods
This was an interventional, double blind and prospective study. This study was performed in 2005-2006 in Isfahan University
of Medical Sciences. 40 medical students were involved in this study.We had 20 medical students in each group. Both groups
first participated in communication skills classes and then their communication skills were evaluated with an objective structured
clinical examination (OSCEI). Then group one participated in video feedback workshop and their communication skills were
evaluated by OSCE2 two months after the course.The communication skills of group two were re-evaluated by OSCE2 after two
months. The score of OSCEI and OSCE2 of both groups were compared. Results were analysed using SPSS I 1.5.
Results
the mean score of communication skills in OSCEI of both groups were compared and the results showed that there was
no significant difference between the both groups (p=0.53). Group one had significantly higher communication skills scores in
OSCE2 after video feedback workshop compared to the communication skill scores of [he group without inrervention (p<OO).
Conclusion
Our training intervention was effective in producing a significant change in medical student's communication skills. Video
feedback was more effective than traditionally didactic methods such as leaure. Repetition of feedback using videotaped perfonnance
may be useful to improve communication skills for medical interview. Evidence suggests that practice with feedback
is an essential ingredient of communication skills courses, and is more effective than other methods such as simply discussing
issues in communication.
