Background: Breast cancer is one the most prevalent cancers among the women. Evaluation of quality of life as an important subject is raised in this disease. All physical and mental symptoms of cancer affect the quality of life in breast cancer patients. Use of complementary therapies and relaxation in cancer may be effective in decreasing pain and emotional distress of these patients. One of the complementary therapies is reflexology. The objective of this study is determining the effect of reflexology on quality of life of breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy.
Materials and Methods: This study is a randomized clinical trial which has been applied on 60 patients referred to Breast Cancer Research Center for Chemotherapy, in 2012. The patients were selected randomly in three groups as intervention, control and placebo. In Intervention group, reflexology was implemented for 3 weeks and each session lasted half an hour. In placebo group only relaxation techniques were implemented for 3 weeks. Control group received the routine therapies of breast cancer. Data were collected by standard questionnaires of EORTIC QLQ-C30.V.3 and EORTIC QLQ-BR23.V.3. The questionnaires were filled before intervention and two weeks after end of study.
Results: There was no significant difference in demographic characteristics or quality of life score of three groups, before intervention. Total score of quality of life was higher in interventional group compared to placebo group before and two weeks after intervention  (p < 0.001) Results also indicated a significant difference in total score of quality of life between three test, placebo and control groups after intervention (p < 0.001). Considerable improvement was noticed in the different aspects of quality of life in test group comparing to two other placebo and control groups
Conclusion: Reduction of pain, anxiety, nausea and other symptoms related to cancer in patients suffering from cancer are assumed as the important cases of nursing cares focus, and precise nursing may subside these symptoms considerably. Using reflexology in patients suffering from breast cancer may improve the quality of life, as an effective method and can be recommended to breast cancer patients.  
Keywords: Breast Cancer, Reflexology, Quality of Life.

