Objective: To explore the cumulative genotoxic damage to glioblastoma (GBM) cells,
grown as multicellular spheroids, following exposure to 6 MV X-rays (2 Gy, 22 Gy) with or
without, 2- methoxy estradiol (2ME2), iododeoxyuridine (IUDR) or topotecan (TPT), using
the Picogreen assay.
Materials and Methods: The U87MG cells cultured as spheroids were treated with 6
MV X-ray using linear accelerator. Specimens were divided into five groups and irradiated
using X-ray giving the dose of 2 Gy after sequentially incubated with one of
the following three drug combinations: TPT, 2-ME2/TPT, IUDR/TPT or 2ME2/IUDR/
TPT. One specimen was used as the irradiated only sample (R). The last group was
also irradiated with total dose of 22 Gy (each time 2 Gy) of 6 MV X-ray in 11 fractions
and treated for three times. DNA damage was evaluated using the Picogreen method
in the experimental study.
Results: R/TPT treated group had more DNA damage [double strand break (DSB)/single
strand break (SSB)] compared with the untreated group (P < 0.05). Moreover the R/
TPT group treated with 2ME2 followed by IUDR had maximum DNA damage in spheroid
GBM indicating an augmented genotoxicity in the cells. The DNA damage was induced
after seven fractionated irradiation and two sequential treatments with 2ME2/IUDR/TPT.
To ensure accuracy of the slope of dose response curve the fractionated radiation was
calculated as 7.36 Gy with respect to ?/B ratio based on biologically effective dose (BED)
formulae.
Conclusion: Cells treated with 2ME2/IUDR showed more sensitivity to radiation and
accumulative DNA damage. DNA damage was significantly increased when GBM
cells treated with TPT ceased at S phase due to the inhibition of topoisomerase
enzyme and phosphorylation of Chk1 enzyme. These results suggest that R/TPTtreated
cells increase sensitivity to 2ME2 and IUDR especially when they are used
together. Therefore, due to an increase in the level of DNA damage (SSB vs. DSB)
and impairment of DNA repair machinery, more cell death will occur. This in turn may
improve the treatment of GBM.
