Objective: In recent years emphasis has been placed on evaluation studies and the publication
of scientific papers in national and international journals. In this regard the publication
of scientific papers in journals in the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) database
is highly recommended. The evaluation of scientific output via articles in journals indexed
in the ISI database will enable the Iranian research authorities to allocate and organize
research budgets and human resources in a way that maximises efficient science production.
The purpose of the present paper is to publish a general and valid view of science
production in the field of stem cells.
Materials and Methods: In this research, outputs in the field of stem cell research are
evaluated by survey research, the method of science assessment called Scientometrics
in this branch of science. A total of 1528 documents was extracted from the ISI database
and analysed using descriptive statistics software in Excel.
Results: The results of this research showed that 1528 papers in the stem cell field in the Web
of Knowledge database were produced by Iranian researchers. The top ten Iranian researchers
in this field have produced 936 of these papers, equivalent to 61.3% of the total. Among
the top ten, Soleimani M. has occupied the first place with 181 papers. Regarding international
scientific participation, Iranian researchers have cooperated to publish papers with researchers
from 50 countries. Nearly 32% (452 papers) of the total research output in this field has
been published in the top 10 journals.
Conclusion: These results show that a small number of researchers have published
the majority of papers in the stem cell field. International participation in this field
of research unacceptably low. Such participation provides the opportunity to import
modern science and international experience into Iran. This not only causes scientific
growth, but also improves the research and enhances opportunities for employment
and professional development. Iranian scientific outputs from stem cell research
should not be limited to only a few specific journals.
