Background: The public health impact of parasitic infection has been consistently underestimated in the past, but there is now a general consensus that diseases caused by intestinal parasites represent an important public health problem, especially children. Recent studies suggest that even moderate intensity of infection may have adverse effects on growth, iron deficiency anemia and cognitive function, practically for children of school age.
Objective: Aim of the present study was to determine the intestinal parasitic infection in school going children.
Materials and Methods: The stool samples were collected from different municipal school in and around Amalapuram according to the standard procedures between June 2006 to August 2006. All the stool samples were examined by the direct microscopic examination and by the formalin-ether concentration methods. Analysis of the data was carried out by using Epi info software.
Results: A total 208 stool specimen were collected. The mean age group was 8.8 ± 2.11. 133 (63.9%) were infected with one or more intestinal parasites. 95 (71.4%) of the students were infected with single parasite, 38 (28.6%) with two or more parasites. The most common was Entamoeba histolytica (E.histolytica) with 41 (30.8%) single and 26 (19.54%) with multiple infections. The second most common was Giardia intestinalis (G.intestinalis) with 25 (18.8%) single and 25 (18.8%) with multiple infections. The third one was Entamoeba coli (E.coli) with 15 (11.3%) single and 17 (12.78%) with multiple infections. E.histolytica and G.intestinalis were the most commonly found parasite in multiple infections. 1.5% of Ascaris lumbricoides, 5.3% Hookworm, 0.8% Enterobius vermicularis and 0.8% of Trichuris trichuria were found in the stool sample.
Conclusions: Intestinal parasitic infection is an important public health problem in Andhra Pradesh, India. Rural residence, mother education less than primary school and no hand wash with soap after toilets were the significant risk factors. Interventions including health education on personal hygiene, appropriate water management like boiling and use of latrines to the school children and to the parents.The public health impact of parasitic infection has been consistently underestimated in the past, but there is now a general consensus that diseases caused by intestinal parasites represent an important public health problem, especially children. Recent studies suggest that even moderate intensity of infection may have adverse effects on growth, iron deficiency anemia and cognitive function, practically for children of school age.
