Background and objective: University is a highly dynamic and flexible educational environment and organizational silence can affect the students' trust in administrators. On the other hand, the effect of students' educational satisfaction will change the dynamism of university. The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of organizational silence in explaining the relationship between students' trust and educational satisfaction to the university managers. 
Materials and methods: This study was a descriptive-retrospective and correlational method of a structural equation model. 227 students from all the graduate students at Shiraz University of Medical Sciences were selected randomly. The research instrument was a questionnaire with 39 items. Cronbach's alpha was at a high value. Descriptive statistical indices such as mean, standard deviation and structural equation model were used to analyze the data. 
Results: In this research 227 participants (70%   women and 30% men) were selected. Students' trust in administrators was the direct and significant prediction of students' educational satisfaction. The students' trust in administrators was the negative and significant prediction of the organizational silence. But organizational silence had not a mediating role in the relationship between students' trust in administrators and students' educational satisfaction. 
Conclusion: Increasing the trust level of students in university administrators can reduce the silence and encourage them to express the problems and offering resolutions in order to improve university performance. However, the students' decline does not necessarily lead to an increase in the satisfaction level of academic education and students' satisfaction can be influenced directly without organizational silence interference. Therefore the trust of the students in university administrators can directly lead to increased academic satisfaction and finally improvement in the higher education institutions. 

