The effects of ambient temperature and the supplementation of methionine to a low protein diet on egg production, egg quality, blood constituents and nitrogen excretion of laying hens were studied. The objective was to derive an environmental friendly feed formulation for warm climate. Seventy-two 29-week-old commercial White Leghorn hens of Babcock ISA white strain were used in this trial. The design is a completely randomized design with a 2×3 factors arrangement of treatments. Two constant ambient temperatures were 24±1°C and 34±1°C with 85% relative humidity. The three dietary treatments were 170 g kg−1 crude protein, 140 g kg−1 crude protein and 140 g kg−1 crude protein supplemented with methionine 1.4 g kg−1. Hens were allotted into six groups according to egg production and body weight. Birds were raised in individual wire cages for the experimental feeding period of five weeks. At the end of the feeding trial, one replicate of laying hens (four birds) from each treatment were selected for a four-day metabolic study for the daily collection of the excreta. The blood samples were withdrawn from the wing vein for analysis of hematocrit, blood glucose, sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium, phosphorus and uric acid. Experimental results indicate that increases in ambient temperature significantly depress feed intake, egg production, egg weight and live weight of laying hens. High ambient temperature also caused inferior egg quality, including shell weight, shell thickness, shell breaking strength and specific gravity. Ambient temperature also changes the egg components with heavier egg albumin and yolk in the low-temperature group. Increasing ambient temperature also caused an increase in pH value in the plasma. This increase revealed a trend of depressed glucose (P&lt;0.05) in the plasma of the laying hens. The dietary treatments, however, did not significantly influence feed intakes. Except egg weight, laying hens that were fed with the low protein (140 g kg−1) with methionine supplemented diet produced similar numbers of egg and feed conversion as the layers fed with the high protein diet. The low protein with methionine supplemented diet produced significantly lighter eggs than the high dietary protein diet under the high ambient temperature, but produced heavier egg under the low ambient temperature. The concentration of uric acid in the plasma and nitrogen in the excreta of the high protein group was significantly higher than the other two low protein dietary groups (P&lt;0.05).
