The objective of the current study was to investigate the impact of including whole wheat in broiler diets on the development of the digestive tract. Chickens were fed a standard feed containing 400 g ground wheat/kg or the same diet with a part of the wheat given separately as whole grains that increased progressively from 200 g/kg at 8 d to 400 g/kg at 22 d. Every week, from 16 to 44 d, growth performance, modifications of the size of the digestive tract organs and intestinal enzyme activities were investigated. Morphology of villi and crypts in the small intestinal segments (duodenum, jejunum, ileum) were analyzed at 23 and 44 d. Microbacterial counts were performed in jejunal, ileal and caecal contents weekly from 16 to 44 d.

 the adaptation period from 8 to 15 d, the birds fed the whole wheat diet had lower feed intake and lower weight gain. Thereafter, they showed improved growth performance so that by the end of the experiment, they had higher body weight compared to the standard-fed birds, 2430 ± 29 versus 2331 ± 36 g.

 relative weights of gizzard (+26%) and pancreas (+12%) were observed from 16 to 44 d for whole wheat-fed birds compared to standard-fed birds. No differences in relative size of the different intestinal segments were observed, except that the jejunum was shorter. Increased villus to crypt length and surface ratios were observed at 23 d in the duodenum of whole wheat-fed birds, with no differences in morphometry between groups thereafter. Alkaline phosphatase activity was higher from 16 to 44 d in the duodenum and jejunum of whole wheat-fed birds. However, the activities of the digestive enzymes, leucine aminopeptidase and maltase, were similar between the two diets in the measured intestinal segments.

r number of facultative anaerobic bacteria was found in the ileum of the whole wheat-fed birds, with no differences between treatments for Escherichia coli and for Lactobacillus counts. In the jejunum and the caeca, no differences in microflora counts were observed.

esent results showed that feeding whole grains to broilers led mainly to modifications in the upper part of the digestive tract (gizzard, pancreas) and had little influence on the small and large intestine.
