The objective of the present study was to establish the effect of deoxynivalenol (DON) and T-2 toxin on lipid peroxidation, lymphocyte DNA fragmentation and immunoglobulin production in weaned pigs, and furthermore, to evaluate the potential of vitamin E (α-tocopheryl acetate) in prevention of toxin mediated changes. Forty-eight weaned castrated male crossbred pigs (mean live weight at the beginning of the experimental period was 11.7 kg) were randomly assigned to five experimental groups: control (without toxin and vitamin E), T-2 (3 mg/kg T-2 toxin), T-2 + E (3 mg/kg T-2 toxin + 100 mg/kg vitamin E), DON (4 mg/kg DON) and DON + E (4 mg/kg DON + 100 mg/kg vitamin E). After 14 days of treatment blood was collected for analysis. Lipid peroxidation was studied by assays of malondialdehyde (MDA), total antioxidant status (TAS) of plasma and erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase (GPx). DNA damage in lymphocytes was measured by comet assay. Serum immunoglobulin levels were evaluated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and the hepatotoxicity was studied by measuring plasma liver enzyme levels (alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and γ-glutamyl-transferase (GGT). Production parameters of both DON groups were significantly impaired in comparison to the control. DON significantly increased the amount of DNA damage in lymphocytes by 28%. Moreover, the levels of TAS were lowered by addition of DON. T-2 toxin significantly impaired daily live weight gain and feed conversion, increased the amount of DNA damage in lymphocytes by 27%, decreased total serum IgG and did not alter plasma TAS. Plasma and 24-h urinary malondialdehyde (MDA) excretion rate and erythrocyte Gpx levels did not differ among the groups. Supplementation with vitamin E did not improve production parameters impaired by DON and T-2 toxin and only partially protected lymphocyte DNA from toxin impact. To our knowledge, these are the first data on genotoxic effects of moderate doses of DON and T-2 toxin on pig lymphocytes. The effect of DON and T-2 toxin on the immune system was reflected as a change in immunoglobulin synthesis, which might be toxin and species specific. According to other results no major induction of oxidative stress could be proven. Enhancement of antioxidant status with vitamin E in the case of DON and T-2 toxin intoxication can be beneficial for remaining the lymphocyte DNA integrity.
