After conventional waterflood processes the residual oil in the reservoir remains as a discontinuous phase in the form of oil drops trapped by capillary forces and is likely to be around 70% of the original oil in place (OOIP). The EOR method so-called alkaline–surfactant–polymer (ASP) flooding has proved to be effective in reducing the oil residual saturation in laboratory experiments and field projects through the reduction of interfacial tension and mobility ratio between oil and water phases.

ical step to make ASP floodings more effective is to find the optimal values of design variables that will maximize a given performance measure (e.g., net present value, cumulative oil recovery) considering a heterogeneous and multiphase petroleum reservoir. Previously reported works using reservoir numerical simulation have been limited to sensitivity analyses at core and field scale levels because the formal optimization problem includes computationally expensive objective function evaluations (field scale numerical simulations). This work presents a surrogate-based optimization methodology to overcome this shortcoming.

oposed approach estimates the optimal values for a set of design variables (e.g., slug size and concentration of the chemical agents) to maximize the cumulative oil recovery from a heterogeneous and multiphase petroleum reservoir subject to an ASP flooding. The surrogate-based optimization approach has been shown to be useful in the optimization of computationally expensive simulation-based models in the aerospace, automotive, and oil industries. In this work, we improve upon this approach along two directions: (i) using multiple surrogates for optimization, and (ii) incorporating an adaptive weighted average model of the individual surrogates.

ted approach involves the coupled execution of a global optimization algorithm and fast surrogates (i.e., based on Polynomial Regression, Kriging, Radial Basis Functions and a Weighted Average Model) constructed from field scale numerical simulation data. The global optimization program implements the DIRECT algorithm and the reservoir numerical simulations are conducted using the UTCHEM program from the University of Texas at Austin.

fectiveness and efficiency of the proposed methodology is demonstrated using a field scale case study.
