The objective of this study was to investigate how level of forage and oils in ruminant animals’ diet affect selected strains of ruminal bacteria believed to be involved in biohydrogenation (BH). Four continuous culture fermenters were used in 4 × 4 Latin square design with a 2 × 2 factorial arrangement over four consecutive periods of 10 days each. The experimental diets used in this study were: high forage diet (700:300 g/kg (DM basis) forage to concentrate; HFC), high forage with oil supplement (HFO), high forage diet (300:700 g/kg (DM basis) forage to concentrate; LFC), and high forage with oil supplement (HFO). The oil supplement was a blend of fish oil (FO) and soybean oil (SBO) added at 10 and 20 g/kg DM, respectively. Acetate concentration was greater (P&lt;0.01) with the high forage diets whereas propionate concentration was greater (P&lt;0.02) with the low forage diets and both decreased (P&lt;0.05) with oil supplementation. The concentrations of t11 C18:1 (vaccenic acid, VA) and c9t11 conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) were greater (P&lt;0.01) with the high than the low forage diets and concentrations increased (P&lt;0.01) with oil supplementation particularly when added with the high forage diet. The concentrations of t10 C18:1 and t10c12 CLA were greater (P&lt;0.01) with the low than the high forage diets and concentrations increased (P&lt;0.01) with oil supplementation particularly when added with the low forage diet. The DNA abundance of Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens, Ruminococcus albus, Ruminococcus flavefaciens, Anaerovibrio lipolytica and Butyrivibrio proteoclasticum were greater (P&lt;0.03) with the high than the low forage diets. Oil supplementation reduced (P&lt;0.05) the DNA abundance only for R. flavefaciens, B. fibrisolvens and R. albus especially when added with the high forage diet. Results from this study suggest that the greater trans fatty acids (FA) production seen with the high forage diets may be related to greater activity of B. fibrisolvens, R. flavefaciens and R. albus, and B. proteoclasticum appears to play a minor role in the production of C18:0 from trans C18:1.
