Objective of this study was to investigate the effect of feeding protected fat and proteins on milk production, composition and nutrient utilization in Murrah buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis). Eighteen buffaloes were divided into two groups (9 each) on the basis of most probable production ability. Buffaloes in control group (C group; most probable production ability 2204 kg) were fed chaffed wheat straw, chopped maize fodder and concentrate mixture as per requirements. Buffaloes in supplemented group (S group; most probable production ability 2211 kg) were fed same ration as C group plus 2.5% rumen protected fat (on dry matter intake basis) and formaldehyde treated mustard and groundnut oil cake (1.2 g formaldehyde/100 g crude protein) in place of unprotected cakes. Group S buffaloes were supplemented rumen protected fat and protein 60 days pre-partum to 90 days postpartum and persistence of milk production was monitored up to 210 days of lactation. Milk yield during supplementation period (90 days) in S group was 13.11 kg/d and was 19% higher (P&lt;0.01) than the C group (11.01 kg/d), whereas after supplement withdrawal (120 days), it was 11.04 kg/d and was 15% higher (P&lt;0.01) than the C group (9.61 kg/d). There was no effect on total solid, protein, solid-not fat (SNF) and lactose contents in the two groups, whereas milk fat yield was increased (P&lt;0.05) and level of milk urea nitrogen was decreased (P&lt;0.01) in S group. Moreover, the supplement produced noticeable changes in the fatty acid profile of the milk fat, i.e., reduction in the concentration of saturated fatty acids (SFA) by 19% and an increase in that of unsaturated fatty acids (USFA) by 36%. Besides, digestibility of dry matter, crude protein, acid detergent fiber and neutral detergent fiber were not affected, whereas ether extract digestibility was higher (P&lt;0.05) in S group. There was no effect on plasma glucose, non-esterified fatty acids, triglycerides and cholesterol concentrations between two groups, whereas blood urea nitrogen concentration was lower (P&lt;0.01) in S group. Supplementation of protected nutrients to buffaloes increased milk production and unsaturated fatty acids content in milk fat and persistence of lactation after supplements were withdrawn.
