The objective of this study was to evaluate the effects of partial replacement of soybean oil by fish oil on dry matter intake (DMI), growth, carcass characteristics, and meat fatty acid profile of feedlot lambs. Fifty Santa Ines male lambs with 17.1 ± 2.8 of initial body weight (BW) were individually penned and used in a randomized complete block design with 10 blocks and 5 treatments. Dietary treatments, dry matter (DM) basis, consisted of: (1) control diet (CONT) with a 10:90 of forage to concentrate ratio, (2) control diet supplemented with 40 g/kg of soybean oil (0FO), (3) control diet supplemented with 2.5 g/kg of fish oil blend + 37.5 g/kg of soybean oil (25FO), (4) control diet supplemented with 5 g/kg of fish oil blend + 35 g/kg of soybean oil (50FO), and (5) control diet supplemented with 7.5 g/kg of fish oil blend + 32.5 g/kg of soybean oil (75FO). Diets were mixed once daily and fed ad libitum. At the end of the 84-day feeding trial, all animals were slaughtered for carcass characteristics evaluations and meat fat acid profile determination. Animals fed soybean oil had reduced DMI compared to control; however, the average daily gain (ADG), feed efficiency (FE) and final BW were not affected. The animals fed fish oil had similar DMI, ADG, FE and final BW to those receiving the control treatment. The DMI, ADG, FE and final BW were not affected by the increasing substitution of soybean oil for fish oil. Most carcass characteristics were not affected by treatments. The shrink after chilling was lower for the 50FO diet. Short, medium, and long-chain fatty acids were similar for all diets. Stearic acid concentration was higher for lambs fed the fat diets vs. control. However, stearic acid concentration decreased linearly when fish oil replaced soybean oil. Vaccenic acid concentration was higher for lambs fed fat diets vs. control. In addition, vaccenic acid increased linearly with fish oil inclusion. The conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) C18:2 cis-9, trans-11 showed higher concentration in meat of animals fed diets containing fish oil compared to control, but it was not affected by soybean oil inclusion. Feeding small amounts of fish oil blend plus soybean oil does not exert an additional effect on the concentration of CLA C18:2 cis-9, trans-11 in relation to the exclusive use of soybean oil. However, the mixture of 7.5 g/kg DM of fish oil blend with 32.5 g/kg DM of soybean oil is recommended, because it improves the lipid profile of the meat by increasing the concentration of vaccenic acid, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). Additionally, supplementing 7.5 g/kg DM of fish oil blend mixed with 32.5 g/kg DM of soybean had no negative effect on the feed intake, ADG, FE and carcass characteristics of the lambs fed high concentrate diet.
