Introduction 
Social happiness is part of the social welfare component and it depends more to the social and economic determinants than psychological and medical interventions. Meanwhile, this is one of the core concepts of sustainable development. Being happy is just one of the desirable life in the society. The nation is more fresh and certainly more welfare. In this type of society, they have optimistic attitude towards life and the things around them. From 2000 onwards, variables such as happiness, hope to future, pleasure and satisfaction of community members has been included as a key variable in the UN debate to determine the level of development of countries. This phenomenon is measured by the density of social networks and relationships, in many studies to be associated with social health and happiness (Kawachi, 2008). Durkheim showed that suicide rates in populations with low levels of participation and social cohesion was more than cohesive communities (Halpern, 2005).Theory theorists satisfy the needs and objectives argue that when people move to the desired location or target value, they are happy. Theorists in satisfied the needs and objectives theory argue that when people celebrate achieving the desired location to move or reach the target value. (Michalos happy acknowledged feeling of happy depends on various factors, such as what the person wants?, What is the past? and what about the others? (Michalos, 1991). According to Lerner, the new community is a participatory society and modernization process, a move from traditional society to participate society. In this view, economic participation lead to activity in market and an increase income, political participation to participate in elections, cultural participation to utilization of mass media and emotional involvement to empathy and psychological mobility (Lerner 1969: 86).

 
Material & Methods
Describing qualitative variables were used percentage and frequency and to describe quantitative variables, used central index such as dispersion and mean, standard deviation, minimum and maximum. To test the hypotheses, was used Pearson's correlation coefficient  and analysis of variance, and also for explaining the social happiness, according to the independent variables has been used a stepwise multiple regression.

Discussion of Results & Conclusions
The results of the present research approve the relationship between participation and happiness. Also in line with the results of empirical internal investigation [Akbarpourbeny and colleagues (2011), Eliasi (2002) and Neshatdoost et al (2009)] and external investigations [Haller and Hadlr (2006)] endorse the relationship and interaction between participation and happiness. Similar to Hezarjarib and Astinfeshan research (2010), has been evaluated social happiness in moderate level. At the same time, this research is in line with safari research (2010) regarding the lack of difference between discipline and marital status with social happiness and unlike some of the research results such as Ambari & Haggi(2014) and Zare Shahabadi et al (2012) regarding the relationship between marital status with social happiness and social participation.
The present research emphasis on the lack of a significant difference between males and females in the social participation and happiness. But Similar to Eddington and Showmen research (2004), the females are happier than males. In this study, the three dimensions of participation, collaborative spirit have a greater impact on the social happiness and the result is in line with the results of Larson (2000) and Peterson (2000). In this research, look at different aspects of happiness well indicate that respondents are a high scores in personal dimension, but in social dimension of life satisfaction have acquired lower scores. This result has been consistent with Lyubomirsky and colleagues’ research (2005).The happiness of the students is assessed at average levels and or medium-high. But the students in participation and social activities did not objective participation, while the spirit of partnership and subjective participation earned a high score. That is, people do not obtained their happiness through social partnership and as our results show, only 17 percent of social happiness variation is explained by the social participation

Keywords: Social Happiness, Social Participation, Objective Participation, Subjective Participation, Spirit of Participation

