In this paper, a novel approach based on multiobjective particle swarm optimization (MOPSO) is presented for panchromatic (Pan) sharpening of a multispectral (MS) image. This new method could transfer spatial details of the pan image into a high-resolution version of the MS image, while color information from the low-resolution MS image is well preserved. The pan and MS images are locally different because of different resolutions, and therefore we cannot directly combine them in the spatial domain. For this reason, we generate two initial results, which are more appropriate for a weighted combination. First, the pan and the MS images are histogram matched. Then we use the shiftable contourlet transform (SCT) to decompose the histogram-matched pan and MS images. The SCT is a new shiftable and modified version of the contourlet transform. In this step, an algorithm based on the SCT is used to generate two initial results of the high-resolution MS images. Our objective is to produce two modified high-resolution MS images, in which one has high spatial similarity to the pan image and the other one has high radiometric quality in each band. Therefore, we have used two different fusion rules to integrate the high-frequency contourlet coefficients of the pan and MS images to generate two initial results of high-resolution MS image or the pan-sharpened (PS) image. Finally, we can find the optimal PS image by applying the MOPSO algorithm and using the two initial PS results. Specifically, the PS image is obtained via a weighted combination of the two initial results, in which the weights are locally estimated via a multiobjective particle swarm optimization algorithm to generate a PS image with high spatial and radiometric qualities. Based on experimental results obtained, the produced pan-sharpened image also has good spectral quality. The efficiency of the proposed method is tested by performing pan-sharpening of high-resolution (Quickbird and Wordview2) and medium-resolution (Landsat-7 ETM +) datasets. Extensive comparisons with the state-of-the-art pan-sharpening algorithms indicate that our new method provides improved subjective and objective results.
