Background and objective: Imitation cheeses are cheese-like products produced by blending individual ingredients, such as fat, protein, water and edible acids, with a mixture of emulsifying salts. The main protein sources in dairy-based imitation cheeses are rennet casein or sodium and calcium caseinates. Rennet casein is usually preferred to the other protein sources due to its functional properties and desirable flavor. However, in the present study sodium caseinate was employed as the protein source because of its higher availability and lower price in Iran. Also, whey protein concentrate (WPC) and enzyme-modified Lighvan cheese (EMC) were used to improve functional and sensory characteristics of the imitation cheese produced. 
Materials and methods: Imitation cheeses were formulated with three levels of WPC (0, 1.5 and 3%) and of EMC (0, 2.5 and 5%).  Meltability and color parameters were assessed using the image processing technique. Other textural specifications, including hardness, adhesiveness, cohesiveness and springiness, were measured using a texture analyzer. Chemical analyses and sensory evaluation were done using the comon methods and the 5-point hedonic scale, respectively.
Results: The data showed that all the textural specifications were influenced by WPC and EMC (p < 0.05). In addition, based on the results of chemical analyses, increases in both variables affected significantly the protein and ash contents, as well as the pH of all the immitation cheese samples (p < 0.05); however, no significant difference was observed as regards fat, salt and moisture contents. Also, the effect of both variables on the color parameters were found to be statistically significant (p < 0.05). Finally, no statistical difference was observed between the overall acceptability of samples containing 2.5% or 5% EMC as judged by the sensory evaluation panel members.  
Conclusions: On the whole, results of the present study indicate that the physico-chemical and sensory characteristics of immitation cheese can be changed significantly by whey protein concentrate and enzyme-modified Lighvan cheese, the magnitudes of changes being a function of  the amounts used.
Keywords: Enzyme-modified Lighvan Cheese, Immitation Cheese, Physico-chemical Properties, Sensory Properties, Whey Protein Concentrate

