The production of coalbed methane (CBM) represents a vital new source of natural gas supply in Western Canada. There are, however, concerns over potential negative environmental impacts on shallow groundwater resources in the hypothetical case that leakage of fluids and gases from CBM operations occurs. This paper compares major ion and isotope geochemistry data for produced fluids or gases from two major coal deposits in Western Canada (Mannville Formation and the Horseshoe Canyon/Belly River Group) with similar data collected for shallow groundwater in south-central Alberta. The objective was to generate comprehensive baseline geochemical data to determine the key geochemical characteristics and differences of produced fluids and gases from two coal deposits and shallow groundwater in Alberta and to find parameters that are suitable for identifying potential leakage of fluids or gases into shallow groundwater. Shallow groundwater had average total dissolved solids (TDS) of 1037 mg/L. Most samples belonged to the Na–HCO3–SO4 water type and average SO 4 2 - concentrations were 185 mg/L. The Horseshoe Canyon/Belly River Group swabbing fluids had average TDS of 5427 mg/L, a Na–HCO3 water type, and average SO 4 2 - concentrations of 47.7 mg/L. The produced fluids from the Mannville Formation had average TDS contents of 74,500 mg/L, negligible SO 4 2 - and a Na–Cl water type. Shallow groundwater and produced fluids from the Horseshoe Canyon Formation and the Mannville group had distinct δ2H and δ18O values and plotting δ18O values versus total dissolved solids was found to be an effective approach to distinguish the waters. Sulfur isotope data revealed the occurrence of bacterial (dissimilatory) SO4 reduction in some shallow groundwater samples and in the produced fluids from the Horseshoe Canyon/Belly River Group.

e was found in several shallow groundwater samples and its average δ13C (−72.1 ± 6.8‰) and δ2H values (−297 ± 17‰) indicated a biogenic origin predominantly from CO2 reduction. Dissolved gases from the Horseshoe Canyon Formation fluids with average δ13C values of methane of −54.0 ± 4.1‰ and ethane of −36.5 ± 2.4‰ and traces of higher alkanes suggest a mixture of predominantly biogenic and some thermogenic gas. Dissolved hydrocarbon gas from the Mannville Formation had the highest average δ13C values of −49.4 ± 3.6‰ for methane, −28.8 ± 2.1‰ for ethane and −26.9 ± 1.1‰ for propane. The presence of higher alkanes suggests that the Mannville produced fluids contain an appreciable thermogenic gas component. The biogenic gas component in the Horseshoe Canyon and the Mannville Formation was mainly formed via acetate fermentation according to αCO2–CH4 values between 1.02 and 1.07.

concluded that δ18O values of the fluids in concert with total dissolved solids, and the isotopic compositions of methane and ethane are sufficiently distinct in shallow groundwater and produced fluids from the Horseshoe Canyon and the Mannville Formations that they may serve as tracers for evaluating potential contamination of shallow groundwater with produced fluids or gases.
