To date, most studies of commercial fisheries bycatch have focused on mortality at time of capture as an endpoint. However, sub-lethal indicators of organismal condition have the potential to reveal mechanisms associated with mortality (both at time of capture and post-release) and opportunities for improving fish welfare. In this study, we simulated commercial fishing efforts in inland lakes with fyke nets during a typical fishing season (early April to late June) in southeastern Ontario, Canada, where bycatch of non-target fish species had previously been documented. Using non-target gamefish (i.e., largemouth bass [Micropterus salmoides, Lacépède], northern pike [Esox Lucius, L.]), as well as a target species (i.e., bluegill [Lepomis macrochirus, Rafinesque]), we examined the sub-lethal consequences of capture (e.g., blood physiology, reflex impairment, and injury) and compared the effects of being retained in the net for two different durations (i.e., two or six days) over a range of water temperatures (i.e., 3–28 °C). Sub-lethal physiological disturbances (i.e., blood glucose and lactate) in largemouth bass and bluegill tended to be greater at higher water temperatures. However, fish retained for six days generally did not exhibit greater stress than those retained for two days, with the exception of plasma glucose in largemouth bass. Reflex impairment was similar among temperature and retention periods. Fish retained in nets experienced a range of injuries (including fin frays, scale loss, and mouth damage) that had the potential to facilitate the development of opportunistic pathogenic infections. Greater incidences of injury on fish bycatch tended to be associated with higher temperatures and longer retention. To reduce physiological disturbances and injury that could lead to delayed mortality, we suggest that regulations for inland commercial fishers require them to check their nets more frequently as water temperatures increase. We suggest that future studies of bycatch incorporate sub-lethal endpoints given that they serve as an objective measure of fish welfare and can provide quantitative mechanistic information to support management actions.
