Background: The incidence rate of gastric cancer in Western countries has shown a remarkable decline in recent years although it is still the almost common cancer between men in Iran. The proto-oncogene MYC, located at 8q24.1, regulates almost 15% of human genes and is activated in 20% of all tumors. MYC amplification and overexpression of its protein product are observed in 15-30% of gastric neoplasia. The objective of this study was to find the preference of CISH or IHC in the diagnosis and prognosis of gastric cancer.
Methods: In this cross-sectional investigation, 102 paraffin blocks samples of Iranian patients with gastric cancers were studied. All the patients had undergone primary surgical resection at the Cancer Institute Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences from 1987 to 1993. CISH and IHC techniques were applied to the samples. CISH was carried out on 3-µm-thick tissue sections and with a ZytoDot CISH Implementation Kit (ZytoVision GmbH, Germany). IHC was down using the HRP method with the monoclonal antibody. A universal peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody kit was used for the detection system. All samples were gastric adenocarcinoma and were selected randomly.
Results: Our data revealed that both diffuse and intestinal types of gastric cancer occurred significantly in men more than women. Our results showed an indication of some correlation between grades and CISH results, although the difference was not significant. Our data also showed that CISH+ patients (43.1%) were more frequent in comparison with IHC+ patients (14.7%). There was a correlation between CISH and IHC. This result revealed that there was a significant difference between grades and IHC. There was also no statistically significant difference between CISH amplification in diffuse and intestinal types. 
Conclusion: Our conclusion is that for the treatment, management of stomach cancer, and monitoring of progress and prognosis of the tumor that is almost important for patients and clinicians, CISH test is a better and feasible to IHC test, with regards to sensitivity and specificity.

