Economic production from tight sand gas reservoirs usually involves multistage hydraulic fracturing. High costs of water acquisition and waste water disposal, and the lack of available water resources near operation sites, make the reuse of produced water an unavoidable option. However, recycling produced water in hydraulic fracturing jobs result in low quality fracturing fluids, which usually have high levels of hardness and salinity. This is especially true for flowback fluids, which contain high polymer loading. The viscosity and rheological properties of fracturing fluids significantly affect leak-off rate, proppant placement, length and width of fractures, fracture conductivity, and consequently, the success of the treatment. The objective of this study is to determine the acceptable dissolved solid contents for flowback fluids to prepare fracturing fluids.

es of 36 flowback fluid samples from the West Texas region were collected, and experimental studies were conducted on the analysis of the dissolved solids of produced water, which affect the application of flowback fluids and the capability of prepared fluids in proppant transport and handling. A high-pH borate crosslinked guar-based polymer was selected to determine the ranges of acceptable salt contents. Dynamic viscosity and rheological properties tests, static proppant settling, and small-amplitude oscillation rheology were the methods used to evaluate prepared samples at low, medium, and high temperatures up to 305ʡF (152ʡC).

ivalent cations such as calcium and magnesium have negative effects on the prepared polymers. Magnesium is the controlling ion, and approximately 30% of flowback fluids must be treated to meet the maximum acceptable concentration criterion. While monovalent cations such as sodium and potassium were tolerable at higher concentrations and the potassium contents in almost all flowback fluids met the determined acceptable value, more than 40% of samples required treatment for high sodium ion concentrations. Although the presence of other ions such as iron shows no significant variation in fracturing fluid properties, they can affect treatment in special cases. Adjusting the concentrations of the polymer, buffer, and crosslinker can minimize the adverse effects of temperature and salts. The fluids prepared with the determined ranges of dissolved solids showed reasonable thermal stability and proppant transport characteristics. This paper introduces the practical operating range for produced water composition and defines the ions that can adversely impact borate-crosslinked fracturing fluid characteristics at different temperatures.
