Abstract
Introduction: Despite the emphasis of World Health Organization on limiting antibiotics, its use is increasing worldwide. Since studies have shown that personality has a role in determining individuals’ health behavior ,thus it is possible to change one’s health behaviors like self medication through suitable interventions.   
Objective: Present study aims to determine the relationship between personality characteristics and self use of antibiotics among students.
Methods: In this co relational descriptive study, 405 students of Qom universities entered the study by available sampling method and were asked to complete both questionnaires of Neuroticism Extraversion Openness Inventory and demographic information. Data were analyzed through   descriptive and inferential statistics such as t-test, Mann Whitney and chi-square.
Results: Study participants consisted of 255 female and 150 male students with an average age of 21.76 ± 4.39 years. 53.8% of students stated using antibiotics in last three months and of which 49.8% obtained antibiotics by physician prescription, and the rest (50.2%) without a prescription. The most common cause of antibiotic use was symptoms of cold and rhinorhea and Amoxicillin was the most used antibiotic. No feeling of need to refer to physician during illness was listed as the most common reason for self-medication with antibiotics. Study results indicated that participants had moderate level of neuroticism, extraversion, agreeableness and conscientiousness. The mean score of personality dimensions showed no significant difference in two groups of self-medication users and non-users (P > 0.05).
Conclusion: Considering the high prevalence of self-medication among students, it is necessary to increase awareness and promote development of students' attitudes and performance through proper interventions. Also, further studies seem necessary on impact of personality characteristics and psychological aspects on self medication of antibiotics.


