Objective: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the satisfaction of landmine victims less than 18 years of the types of services provided by Veterans and Martyr Affair Foundation (VMAF).

Materials and Methods: The descriptive study evaluated the status of services to all landmine victims less than 18 years from Iran. Satisfaction level was measured using a self-administered questionnaire based on seven categories of services provided by VMAF. Total score ranged between 7, the least satisfactory to 35, the most satisfactory. Also, by two open questions, difficulties in using the service were investigated in more details. Finally, all data were analyzed by SPSS 22 software and independent sample t-test and ANOVA statistical tests.

Results: The mean age of 78 survivors in this study consisted of 67 (85.9%) boys and 11 (14.1%) girls was 16.1±1.9 years. The mean score of satisfaction was 14.92±5.46. Cronbach's alpha was found as 0.76, showing that the scale is reliable. The group of specialists of Janbazan Medical and Engineering Research Center (JMERC) approved the validity of the scale. Health care services had the highest (18.2%) and sports services had the least satisfaction (5.1%). More than half of the cases were dissatisfied of the low awareness with service delivery (57.7%). The most common problems in getting health care services were high cost (61.5%) and then waiting long time for visiting doctor and the uncertainty about solving their problem in hospitals (48.7%). Significant relationships were observed between satisfaction with age at the time of casualty (p=0.02), disability percentage (p=0.04), spinal cord injury (p=0.04) and province of residence (p=0.006).

Conclusion: The satisfaction of landmine victims less than 18 years of the types of services provided by VMAF in living in border areas was at the moderate level. Although health care services had the most satisfaction level but, enumerate the various problems in receiving these services have shown significant barriers, especially in the fast and convenient access to health care services.

