BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Stroke is the third main cause of mortality and the most important origin of disability in the world. Atorvastatin has been shown to have strong anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects on various pathological conditions. This study aimed to investigate the possible protective effects of atorvastatin on neuronal injury and damage in an experimental model of focal cerebral ischemia in rats.
METHODS: This experimental study was conducted on 32 male Wistar rats, divided in four groups of eight: the control group, ischemia control group, and ischemia treated with atorvastatin (pre-treatment and post-treatment groups). Cerebral ischemia was determined as 90 minutes of middle cerebral artery occlusion, and 24 hours of reperfusion. Atorvastatin (40 mg/kg) was injected intraperitoneally one hour before ischemia induction, and immediately after the initiation of reperfusion. Moreover, evaluation of motor neuron disorders (NDS index), lesion volumes (TTC dyes) and damage recognition were performed 24 hours after the occlusion of the middle cerebral artery. 
FINDINGS: In this study, the occlusion of middle cerebral artery caused significant lesions in the right hemisphere of the rats in the ischemia control group (483±69 mm3), with NDS of 3.20±0.20. Use of atorvastatin in the pre- and post-treatment ischemia groups significantly reduced lesion volumes to 68% and 54%, respectively (P < 0.05). In addition, NDS reduced by 25% in both treatment groups (P < 0.05). In histological investigations, atorvastatin significantly decreased the number of damaged neurons and eosinophilia, as well as the demyelination of axons and destruction of nerve tissues in the ischemic areas of the brain.
CONCLUSION: According to the results of this study, atorvastatin could effectively reduce the brain damage caused by ischemia-reperfusion, while preventing neuronal destruction and pathological changes of the brain during ischemia.
KEY WORDS: Atorvastatin, Ischemia-Reperfusion, Neuroprotective, Brain Injury, Pathological Changes. 

