Introduction:
Today's ambient environmental catastrophe not only the peace and security of human life and human existence but also threaten rubs it, why the scientific and political debate on the most serious environmental issue. Awareness of environmental conditions and evaluate the changes of the international community in recent years has been the overall focus and Knowledge and understanding of the environment, to detect changes in the management and delivery of management programs is very important.Today, environmental issues have profoundly social context - cultural environment that we should pay attention to. Today, environmental disaster, not only the take away peace and security of human life, But also threatens human existence, For this reason, scientific and political debate on the environment is the highest and the most recent deafening discussions The ultimate objective of environmental protection is in relation to the social environment and enhanced environmental awareness in the community as well as fostering a culture of environmental enforcement at different levels. In this regard, awareness of environmental issues surrounding villagers is the most important programs in developing countries to achieve sustainable development of the rural environment which is considered as one of the most livable places and have been particularly close to his environment, so that it has the most effect on both the environment and their surroundings and therefore have the greatest relationship with the environment. Therefore, their awareness of environmental issues - is considered to be an undeniably necessary.

Purposis:
The main objective of this study was to identify factors that influence the level of environmental awareness of the villagers. Identify the relationship between individual characteristics, behavioral characteristics - psychological, cultural traits - social media and media consumption among rural households in the study area, with regard to the environmental awareness of the objectives of this study.

Method:
Based on the nature of the issue in the study the Research Methodology of descriptive- analysis is applied. The main approach for data collection, research, and survey research method is that the data have been collected in the field. Statistical population includes residents of the village Jaghrq Binalud in Khorasan Razavi province, According to Cochran's formula, a sample of 336 students are selected using systematic random sampling method and have been studied. The data gathering tool, a questionnaire validated by the content of external validity and reliability by Cornbrash’s alpha coefficient (75/0) has been approved. For statistical analysis of survey data using SPSS and appropriate assessment level variables, tests of correlation analysis, analysis of variance and stepwise multiple regression were used.

Results:
Research findings suggest that awareness of environmental issues with villagers is (37.2) percent of the average. There is a significant relationship at 99/0 per cent between the independent variables (social dimensions: individual elements of behavior - psychological, socio - cultural and media consumption) and dependent variable (level of environmental awareness - environmental). Using the radio with the highest coefficient (422/0) as the greatest Impact Factor and access to centers and research stations with coefficient of (0.12), are known as the least influence on the level of environmental consciousness of villagers. Also according to the stepwise regression analysis, five variables (Using radio, interaction with others, social relations at the local level, participation in village affairs and age) have the greatest impact on environmental awareness among villagers.

Conclusion:
Based on the findings, we can conclude that villagers' awareness of environmental issues is at an intermediate level. About the factors influencing environmental awareness, based on factors we can say that radio, interactions with others, local communication, age and participation in village affairs, explain the largest environmental awareness of rural environment. Also from the remaining of two basic dimensions of behavior of psychological regression equation, it can be deduced that these components are along with other components of personal, cultural, social - media consumption in explaining and predicting environmental awareness, is very important. Based on the findings and results to improve the current situation, we propose that:
1. A preliminary scheme to promote environmental awareness among different groups of people (women and men) of all ages and all educational levels, especially (those with low education cycle) was used in order to prevent environmental degradation and pollution.
2. In order to increase environmental awareness of The villagers, it is imperative that the areas of interaction and community participation in environmental decision-making at all levels, particularly in the management, design, implementation, and evaluation of environmental projects and Etc. is Provided.
3. Efficient use of media and mass communications, especially (Radio) in rural areas to enhance and promote community awareness about environmental issues.
