Today, communities and organizations are seeking sustainable competitive advantages. Under these conditions, organizations which identify customer need and adapt themselves with the customer, are more successful. To achieve this objective, knowledge can create a sustainable competitive advantage. In this regard, knowledge management, as a useful approach, plays a key role in organizations to develop their intelligence capital and innovation, and promote their performance. Knowledge management is an insightful subject developed over decades, which, in recent years, has emerged in marketing society. Knowledge management is a field that can create integrity in identification, storing, assessment, marketing and involvement of the entire company’s assets. In other words, it is a collection of processes that governs the creation, dissemination, and utilization of knowledge.
 In recent years, various organizations have focused on knowledge management, and many of them, such as manufacturers and service providers, consider it a key factor in achieving competitive advantages in the market and increasing productivity.
The Balanced Scorecard is a strategic performance management tool that is used extensively in organizations to align business activities to the vision and strategy of the organization, improve internal and external communication, and monitor organization performance. A Balanced Scorecard approach, generally, has four perspectives: financial, customer, internal processes, learning and growth.
In this research, on the one hand, we consider the main activities of knowledge management and, on the other hand, the four perspectives of the balanced scorecard, and then, study the relationship between them.  The main purpose of this study to evaluate the usefulness of knowledge management on organization performance improvement, based on balanced scorecard.
The research method employed in this study uses a questionnaire for data gathering. The statistical society used in this research includes the managers and experts of various industries in Tehran.
The data analysis done by SPSS and Minitab shows that knowledge management has a significant impact on organizational performance.


