The objective of this paper was to investigate the pressure distribution around a cone penetrometer using a pressure sensing mat under laboratory conditions. The investigation was conducted under (1) constrained conditions using cylindrical split pipe molds and (2) unconstrained conditions using a soil box. These tests were conducted in Capay clay and Yolo loam soil containing two different moisture conditions and two compaction levels.

 constrained tests, a maximum radial pressure of 111 kPa was observed in the Capay clay soil with 3.4–4.3% d.b. moisture content and three blows of compaction (cone index value of 2040 kPa) when using the 41 mm diameter split pipe mold. These pressure levels decreased to 82 and 22 kPa, respectively, when 65 and 88 mm diameter molds were used. In both the Capay clay and Yolo loam tests, the average radial pressure and average cone index values showed similar trends.

 unconstrained tests, a maximum pressure of 9.0 kPa was observed in the Capay clay with 4.5% d.b. moisture content and three blows of compaction (cone index value of 550 kPa) at a horizontal distance of 25.4 mm from the vertical axis of the cone penetrometer and minimum pressure levels in the range of 0.2–0.3 kPa when the horizontal distance of the penetrometer was in the range of 56.8–66 mm. The pressure levels are much smaller than the ones obtained in the constrained tests and may suggest that the pressure distribution under field conditions is small at a distance of 25.4 mm or higher from the tip of the cone.

perimental data were statistically analyzed to identify significant factors. The results of the analysis for the constrained test indicated that the mold diameter and number of blows significantly increased the pressure readings within the soil mass. Increasing the mold diameter led to a decrease in the average radial pressure and increasing the number of blows contributed to an increase in the average radial pressure. In the unconstrained test, the average radial pressure distribution at a given point were significantly influenced by the horizontal distance of the point from the vertical axis passing through the center of the penetrometer shaft, soil type, and soil moisture content. Higher pressure values were obtained in the Capay clay tests compared to the Yolo loam tests. In all cases, the pressure levels were greater for the drier soil than for the moist soil.
