In Europe, dynamic olfactometry, as described by the European standard EN 13725, has become the preferred method for evaluating odor emissions emanating from industrial and agricultural sources. Key elements of this standard are the quality criteria for trueness and precision (repeatability). Both are linked to standard values of n-butanol in nitrogen. It is assumed in this standard that whenever a laboratory complies with the overall sensory quality criteria for n-butanol, the quality level is transferable to other, environmental, odors.

gh olfactometry is well established, little has been done to investigate inter laboratory variance (reproducibility). Therefore, the objective of this study was to estimate the reproducibility of odor laboratories complying with EN 13725 as well as to investigate the transferability of n-butanol quality criteria to other odorants.

upon the statistical analysis of 412 odor measurements on 33 sources, distributed in 10 proficiency tests, it was established that laboratory, panel and panel session are components of variance that significantly differ between n-butanol and other odorants (α = 0.05). This finding does not support the transferability of the quality criteria, as determined on n-butanol, to other odorants and as such is a cause for reconsideration of the present single reference odorant as laid down in EN 13725.

e of non-butanol odorants, repeatability standard deviation (sr) and reproducibility standard deviation (sR) were calculated to be 0.108 and 0.282 respectively (log base-10). The latter implies that the difference between two consecutive single measurements, performed on the same testing material by two or more laboratories under reproducibility conditions, will not be larger than a factor 6.3 in 95% of cases.

 as n-butanol odorants are concerned, it was found that the present repeatability standard deviation (sr = 0.108) compares favorably to that of EN 13725 (sr = 0.172). It is therefore suggested that the repeatability limit (r), as laid down in EN 13725, can be reduced from r ≤ 0.477 to r ≤ 0.31.
