Using cyclotron accelerator (at Cyclotron Dept. in Karaj) the radioisotope 201Tl is produced through the  reaction.
The main objective of this paper is to calculate the intensity, energy spectrum and angular distribution of the neutrons produced from the above reactions. The reason is that, if the neutron characteristics are reasonable enough then at the same time that 201Pb (and subsequently 201Tl) is produced, the above nuclear reaction can be considered as a neutron source, which in turn can be applied for different purposes. Of course depends on the application, the neutrons must be collimated and thermalized (if thermal neutron is needed for example for neutron activation analysis). Besides, the knowledge about the characteristics of the emitted neutrons can help us to predict the activity of the concrete walls and equipments in the target room. And also it is possible to design shielding for these sorts of neutron sources.
In this paper the intensity, energy spectrum and angular distribution of neutrons produced from the above mentioned reaction is investigated. In our investigation the thickness of thallium layer assumed to be 70 μm coated on copper sub-layer. The target (thallium) was bombarded by protons with energy 28.5 MeV and 200 μA current. By using the computational code SRIM2000 the average proton energy at different points of the traveling path was calculated and then by using computational code ALICE91 and reaction rate equation, the neutron intensity from the  reaction was determined to be 1.26 × 1013 n/s.
With the same method, the neutron intensity produced from the copper sub-layer i.e. from63Cu + p → 63Zn + n nuclear reaction was calculated to be 9.19 × 1012 n/s. As a result, the total neutron intensity from thallium target and its copper sublayer was determined to be 2.179 × 1013 n/s, which is comparable with some conventional neutron sources such as Am–Be neutron source, and is high enough to be applied for different purposes. Our calculations also showed that the neutron energy spectrum from thallium target and its copper sub-layer has a peak around 1 MeV region. The angular distribution of produced neutrons, has its maximum value at angle 0–2.5° and decreases slowly as the angle of neutron emission increases, and its minimum value occurs at backward direction, i.e. 177.5–180°. It means that the produced neutrons, are mostly emitted in the forward direction.

