Introduction
Health could be studied from different scientific perspectives. From sociological point of view, health is defined more as health feeling rather than the absence of any diseases. In addition, in sociological empirical and theoretical literatures social capital has been introduced as one of the most important social factors that influence the health situation of individuals. Social capital as a multidimensional and multilevel construction has been defined differently within and between scientific disciplines and the famous sociologist of this field.  In this essay, the researcher on the base of definition Shefell, Shah and Putnam of social capital has investigated the relationship between social capital and health feeling of marrid individuals of Yasouj city. 

 
Materials & Methods
Thus, two important kinds of structural and cognitive social capitals have been noticed in examining the relationship between social capital and health feeling.  The more important fact about the mechanism of the relationship between social capital and health feeling is that according to most theorists and researchers the effect of social capital on health is indirect and mediated by variables such as self – esteem, as far as this effect is considered very more important than its direct effect. Thus, the aims of the present study were (1) to investigate the relationship between two kinds of social capital (structural and cognitive) and health feeling of married individual of Yasouj city, and (2) to show that this relationship is mediated by psychological variable of self esteem. The research has done with aid of survey – cross sectional method and the data has collected through instrument of self reported health questionnaire‏ that included the 6-items of Spitzor et al, s Patient Health Questionnaire measurement. Lin's formula was used to determine sample size and on this basis 400 married men and women of Yasouj city were determined as the sample of the research. The sampling method was the classified- quota- random method.

Discussion of Results & Conclusions
Data analysis shows that variables such as social satisfaction, self-esteem, social support, religious participation, interaction with relatives, relationship with friends, and periodical visit- revisiting to acquaintances had positive and significant correlations with the sense of health, respectively; the three variables of social satisfaction, self-esteem, and relationship with friends could explain 17 percent of the variance of respondents’ sense of health. With respect to the mechanism of the effect of social capital on the sense of health, it could be said that the structural dimension of the social capital, by means of its effects on the cognitive dimension, and the two dimensions together influence individuals’ sense of health through the mediation of psychological processes.  Based on the results, we can say that the effect of quality of social relationships on health feeling has been very important than the quantities of them; even some of the relationships (such as neighborhood relationships), because of being stressfulness, could result in reduce the individual’s well being. Finally, in respect of the causal and logical relationship of dimensions of social capital and self esteem with health feeling, it seems more correct to assume that the structural aspects of social capital (objective and quantitative relationships) could increase health feeling only if they lead to qualitative improvement of cognitive aspects of that(especially life satisfaction) and  these two aspects interact with each other by promoting individual’s self esteem lead to health feeling increasing. Thus, it could be said  the prevalent assumption that consider the relationship of social capital and health feeling as a  inevitable positive relationship must be  revised and replaced by the conditional assumption that these relationships only if  increase health feeling that  could improve individual’s life satisfaction and  self esteems.

Keywords: Social Capital, Cognitive and Structural Dimensions, Self-Esteem, Yasouj, Sense of Health 

