The main objective of the present paper is to show a methodology for undertaking rainfall regionalization of a region taking into account the convective features of the precipitation, and useful for establishing homogeneous zones for improving the alert system. This methodology has been applied to a hydrographic region located in northeast Spain, with an area of 16000 km2 and characterized by a highly contrasted topography. Information provided by meteorological radar and 5-min precipitation data for 126 automatic raingauges has been used for the period 1996–2002. The previous analysis done on the basis of the 1927–1981 rainfall rate series for the Jardí raingauge, located in Barcelona, has also been considered. To that end, the first step was to draw up a proposal for classification of the pluviometric episodes. Recourse was had for this purpose to definition of the β parameter, related with the greater or lesser convective character of the event and calculated on the basis of the rainfall intensity at the surface (Llasat, 2001) and, when data are available, on the basis of radar reflectivity. Results show that the threshold of 35 mm/h to characterize convective episodes from raingauge data can be corroborated from the radar point of view when convective precipitation is identified using 2-D algorithms with a reflectivity threshold of 43 dBZ. Once the soundness of the β parameter had been corroborated, it was applied to more than 2900 precipitation episodes recorded in the region, in order to discriminate the features of the different subregions and their time and space distribution throughout the entire series of the samples. Using this definition, 92% of the precipitation events recorded in this region, with accumulated rainfall above 35 mm, are classified as convective ones, representing 95% of the precipitation amount. Application of the β parameter combined with monthly rainfall data allows differentiation of 8 regions with different convective precipitation features.
