The Tancitaro volcano (3860 m) is an andesitic–dacitic stratovolcano located in the western portion of the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt within the state of Michoacán (Mexico). The tectonic activity of this area has likely contributed to a large sector collapse of the volcano. The first findings of a multidisciplinary investigation into this debris avalanche are presented here.

phological analyses, based on the interpretation of orthophotos, satellite imagery and on GIS elaborations, had the objective of determining the main morphometric features of the landslide. The collapse structure is an east-facing horseshoe-shaped crater (4 km wide and 5.3 km long), while the deposit forms a large fan that is 66 km long, covers an area of approximately 1155 km2 and has an estimated volume of 18 km3. Event volume was established by reconstructing the paleo-edifice in a GIS and taking into account volumetric expansion. Cross sections measured in the field were also used for this purpose.

investigations also highlighted the presence of two texturally distinct units, which are referred to as the “block facies” and the “matrix facies”, respectively. The first is responsible for the typical hummock morphologies found in the proximal area. A transitional zone contains a “mixed block and matrix facies” while in the distal portion blocks and megablocks, some of which have a jigsaw puzzle texture, gradually decrease in size until they disappear entirely.

er of matrix samples were collected to conduct direct shear tests, granulometric analyses and classification of the materials.

ta and analyses described above were used to discuss the mechanism controlling the long runout of the avalanche. Based on the comparison between the Tancitaro debris avalanche and similar events we propose that mechanical fluidization was the mechanism responsible for the remarkable mobility of the landslide. The predisposing factors leading to the collapse were also considered. Field observations suggest that these are mainly related to weakening processes operating both in volcanoes and in non-volcanic areas.

nout of the Tancitaro debris avalanche was numerically modeled using DAN-W. The geotechnical parameters determined in the field and from the laboratory analyses were used as input. The DAN-W code models longitudinal spreading and the thickness and velocity of the failed mass by opportunely selecting a specific rheological model (Voellmy, Frictional, Bingham). Thus, it was determined that the two-parameter “Voellmy model” provided the best simulation of the Tancitaro debris avalanche movement, and the best fitting rheological parameters have been found through back analysis.
