2-D 12.5 m-resolution simulations of cloud-to-ground (CG) lightning discharge processes have been performed using an improved stochastic lightning model for different types of cloud charge distributions, such as dipole, tripole, bi-dipole and multi-layer charge structures produced from the numerical simulation of thundercloud electrification. The modelling produced the fine branched channel structure of CG lightning and the results illustrate the relations between CG lightning channel propagation and cloud charge distribution. The simulated features of CG lightning are associated with the observed results. The simulation studies are essential in our understanding of complex charge transfer processes caused by CG lightning discharges in thunderclouds. The induced charges of opposite polarity are deposited or embedded in the local volumes where the bidirectional leaders passed during a CG lightning discharge. Although the embedding affects charge structure only in a pair of significant positive and negative charge regions closest to the ground, the electric field strength acutely weakens and electrostatic energy in thunderclouds is significantly consumed when the discharge terminates. In addition to simulating the upward and downward breakdown of the initial leader to ground and the ensuing return stroke (RS), the simulation assumes that current continues to flow in the channel to ground and determines the upward breakdown until the end of the discharge. For the subsequent discharge sub-process, the upward leader channel tends to transfer the charges with the same polarity as the RS, while the downward leader channel favors transfer of opposite charge to ground. In the sub-processes of a few CG flash simulations, the magnitude of the opposite charges from the downward leader exceeds that of charges with the same polarity from the upward leader so that the net charges transferred to the ground have a reversed polarity to the RS. The simulation presents similar features of CG lightning as those observed in realistic bipolar CG lightning.
