Utilization of water resources, using a combination of simulation and optimization, are a ‎useful and powerful set for specifying decision-making and management strategies. In this ‎regard, MODFLOW mathematical model, as an efficient and cost-effective tool to ‎evaluate different management options was used. After providing a conceptual model of ‎the aquifer, requirement data were defined in different versions of the V. MODFLOW (V. ‎‎5.33) software. Then, the model was calibrated by the manual method that has higher ‎accuracy than software techniques and validation operations were also carried out. In the ‎simulation process, with the goal of water resource management, the results of modeling ‎and calibration model were used to optimize the groundwater table level. In this study, a ‎linear programming model was used for optimizing the management. Lingo software was ‎used to implement this model and achieve the optimal management. The information ‎needed to solve the problem, was based on the output of a simulation model and ‎optimization options. Due to linearity of objective function, a multi-objective linear ‎programming model was selected to solve the problem. General multi-objective ‎optimization problem with n decision variables, m constraints and p objectives is ‎presented in optimizing relationships. The objectives of the optimization problem were ‎maximizing the profits of agricultural products and minimizing the use of aquifer water. ‎Results indicated that the amount of yield and water use were different before and after ‎optimization. . The amount of annual water consumption before optimization was 92.22 ‎million m3 while after optimization was 75.51 million m3. In other words, the rate of water ‎consumption was reduced by 18 prevent. Results also showed that annual water ‎consumption in agriculture was 31.79 million m3 that shows 65.5 percent reduction ‎compared to the present situation. The amount of benefits before optimization was 47, ‎‎798 million Rials, while after optimization it was 63,689 million Rials. In other words, the ‎amount of total profit increased by 33.25 percent. Based on the scenario of a national ‎document (pure water requirement), total profits increased by 15 percent.‎
