Inroduction & Objective: Morpholine is a substance with various applications in industry and agriculture which toxic effects can be absorbed into the body by ingestion, by inhalation and through skin. The present study aimed to study of morpholineand  physiological saline effect on blood parameters and spleen tissue of6-week-old nmri albino male mice .
Materials and Methods: 40 adult male mice were placed in 4 experimental groups including control group, physiological saline (sham) group, treatment group A, fed with 300 mg/kg per day for 15 days, 1 ml of the prepared solution (0.009 ml morpholine+ 0.91 ml of distilled water) and group B, treated using the same method with the same volume of morpholine and physiological saline in the same period of time. After weighing, anesthesia and blood sampling, the number of red blood cells, hematocrit and hemoglobin were respectively measured using Neubauer slide, hematocrit capillary tube, and Sally method applying a plasma density refractometer. Microscopic and structural studies were conducted on prepared slides of spleen and statistical analyses were performed using SPSS19 software. 
Results: Increased number of red blood cells (%6.7), hematocrit (%21), plasma density (%25), and hemoglobin (%10) and decreased thickness of splenic capsule wall and becoming more fibrous (%8.3), increased thickness of central arteriole wall of white pulp (%30), increased spleen weight (%6.14), and reduced body weight (%2.14) were observed in group A, compared to control group and sham group. Considering group B, all listed features (except thickness of splenic capsule wall and weight loss) decreased. The results indicated a significant difference between group A and B (p < 0.05). 
Conclusion: The significance of this relationship indicated that morpholine increased blood parameters, caused parenchyma adhesion, led to inflammation and increased spleen weight and decreased body weight and that physiological saline decreased its adverse effects. Given destructive effects of morpholine and its usage in our daily life, industry should look for a suitable replacement in order to maintain human health.    

Keywords:Morpholine, Blood Parameters, Physiological Saline, Spleen ,Albino NMRI Male White Mice

