Soil surface crusting has a major impact on water infiltration and erosion in many soils. Considerable progress has been made in describing crusting processes and in modelling the impact of crusting on infiltration. Most studies, however, have neglected the high spatial variability in crust characteristics observed in the field. The objective of this experiment was to determine the influence of runoff depth on infiltration rate in the presence of a surface seal varying in hydraulic characteristics with microtopography. The Blosseville silt loam has a low aggregate stability and forms crusts readily. The Villamblain silty clay loam has a greater aggregate stability due to its greater clay and organic matter contents, and it is more resistant to aggregate breakdown processes under rainfall. Samples of the soils were sieved to retain aggregates less than 2.0 cm and packed in 50×50×15 cm soil trays. The trays were surrounded by a 10 cm soil border to compensate for splash loss. After molding the surface into a mound and depression microtopography, the samples were subjected to simulated rainfall at an intensity of 22.8 mm h−1. Hourly measurements of surface roughness showed that the original roughness was smoothed out due to the infilling of depressions by sediments detached from the mounds. For the final hour, runon was added to the top of the soil tray to increase the runoff rate and depth. For both soils, infiltration rate increased more than could be attributed to the increased ponding pressure head. The change in infiltration rate was particularly great for Villamblain. The measurements of hydraulic resistance showed that structural crusts had a lower hydraulic resistance than sedimentary crusts. They also showed that the crusts formed on Villamblain were of a lower hydraulic resistance than those of Blosseville. It appears that small changes in runoff depth can significantly increase infiltration rate when structural crusts of lower hydraulic resistance are inundated. The effect was less important in Blosseville which formed seals of relatively high hydraulic resistance everywhere. The results provide a suitable explanation for field observations of increasing infiltration rate with either increasing rainfall intensity or runoff rate. The results also have implications for the relationships between surface roughness, surface water storage, and infiltration.
