This study focuses on the soils and surficial volcaniclastic layers of Haleakala's crater (Maui, Hawaii). The main objective is to assess the effects of covers with fragments of various sizes (ash, cinder, lapilli) on soil water conservation. Soil and gravel samples were collected in Haleakala National Park from a site at 2505 m where the Hawaiian silversword, a giant rosette-plant, grows densely on pyroclastic materials. An evaporation experiment lasting 22 days showed a gradual drop in seven pairs of soil samples initially at field capacity. One set of samples was left bare, the other was covered by gravel mulches (GM); these resulted in lengthening of T100% (total desiccation time) by a factor of 2.3–5.2. Bare soils dried after 70–140 h, but drying time under gravel was 246–509 h. Mean grain size (Mz) and sorting (φσ) had the greatest influence on evaporation rates. Coarse lapilli (Mz: 13.8 mm) were less effective than fine ash (Mz: 2.9–3.8 mm) in preventing water losses, while medium-grained cinder (Mz: 4–5.2 mm) produced the greatest water savings. Lapilli (mean φσ: 0.48) and ash (φσ: 0.6) were moderately- to well-sorted; cinders, with a broader grain-size range (φσ: 1.13), were poorly sorted. This allowed infilling of large interstices between coarse fragments by smaller grains, effectively reducing pore size and therefore evaporation rates. A second experiment determined water storage and rates of water loss by mulches. Wetting occurred swiftly, within 3–4 min. All gravel types were dry within 26 h. This drying process is important for water conservation, as it effectively prevents further water loss from the mulch surface. Larger fragments stored less water. This is related to their `surface area/weight' ratio, which increases for smaller particles. Thus, fine ash or cinder grains, with a high total area, intercept more water than larger lapilli. A 5-cm thick layer of ash intercepted an average of ∼6.8 mm of rain, slightly more than the same depth of cinder (6.3 mm), but lapilli retained only 4.7 mm. Therefore, light rainfall events are more likely to contribute water to soil under lapilli than below finer pyroclastic material. Volcaniclastic covers serve an important ecological role in Haleakala by prolonging periods of water availability to plants, thus allowing Hawaiian silverswords to grow for longer time spans.
