Context and Objective: Criminal policy undoubtedly carries the ideology
which dominates political power. In some way or another, like political
models, the criminal policy could be divided into liberal, conservative and
radical models.
The question that is answered is: what kinds of criminal policies will be
formed by liberal, conservative, and radical ideological biases.
Methodology: This research is descriptive-analytic and library based and
also based on votes of the International Penal Court in situation of Kenya.
Findings: This paper tries to answer the above-mentioned question
by establishing dimensions and features of criminal policy of liberal,
conservative, and radical biases in three parts. Liberal criminal policy
considers crime as a social and individual matter. This model tries to prevent
crime by relying on strategies based on social development and supporting
vulnerable social groups. The model tries to provide public security by
minimum interference and ensuring maximum level of freedom for citizens,
because the higher the scale of interference of criminal policy, the more
limited the scale of private freedom. The conservative criminal policy
considers the crime as an individual phenomenon, and for prevention, this
model relies on strategies based on policy of law and order that are generally
monitoring-controlling. The model, by great interference in social matters
tries to direct their citizens by threatening them with punishment and penalty.
This model believes citizens do not have proper sense of discernment.
Therefore, conservative criminal policy, with a paternalistic view, tries to
guarantee the demands of citizens by resorting to criminal rights.
Results: the conservative criminal policy has fewer tendencies to use crime as
a political disputation in which people and influential groups manage to control
weak groups by enacting penal law. In this view, crime is void of any content
meaning and only bears the label that the influential people have created.
