Massive clinoptilolite authigenesis was observed at about 1105 meters below sea floor (mbsf) in lower Miocene well-compacted carbonate periplatform sediments from the Great Bahama Bank [Ocean Drilling Program, ODP Leg 166, Site 1007]. The diagenetic assemblage comprises abundant zeolite crystallized within foraminifer tests and sedimentary matrix, as well as Mg smectites. In carbonate-rich deposits, the formation of the zeolite requires a supply of silica. Thus, the objective of the study is to determine the origin of the silica supply, its diagenetic evolution, and consequently the related implications on interpretation of the sedimentary record, in terms of local or global paleoceanographic change. For lack of evidence for any volcaniclastic input or traces of Si-enriched deep fluids circulation, an in situ biogenic source of silica is validated by isotopic data and chemical modeling for the formation of such secondary minerals in shallow-water carbonate sequences. Geochemical and strontium isotopic data clearly establish the marine signature of the diagenetic zeolite, as well as its contemporaneous formation with the carbonate deposition (Sr model ages of 19.6–23.2 Ma). The test of saturation for the pore fluids specifies the equilibrium state of the present mineralogical assemblage. Seawater–rock modeling specifies that clinoptilolite precipitates from the dissolution of biogenic silica, which reacts with clay minerals. The amount of silica (opal-A) involved in the reaction has to be significant enough, at least 10 wt.%, to account for the observed content of clinoptilolite occurring at the most zeolite-rich level. Modeling also shows that the observed amount of clinoptilolite (∼ 19%) reflects an in situ and short-term reaction due to the high reactivity of primary biogenic silica (opal-A) until its complete depletion.

isodic occurrence of these well-lithified zeolite-rich levels is consistent with the occurrence of seismic reflectors, particularly the P2 seismic sequence boundary located at 1115 mbsf depth and dated as 23.2 Ma. The age range of most zeolitic sedimentary levels (biostratigraphic ages of 21.5–22 Ma) correlates well with that of the early Miocene glaciation Mi-1 and Mi-1a global events. Thus, the clinoptilolite occurrence in the shallow carbonate platform environment far from volcanogenic supply, or in other sensitive marine areas, is potentially a significant new proxy for paleoproductivity and oceanic global events, such as the Miocene events, which are usually recognized in deep-sea pelagic sediments and high latitude deposits.
