Background and objective: Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune
disorder. Besides its physical effect on the body, it could also cause depression
and anxiety which could affect spouse and the rest of the family. The aim of this
study was to design and test the effectiveness of a couple-oriented emotionalcognitive-
behavioral intervention model and compare it with a patient-oriented
cognitive-behavioral intervention model on improving the quality of the
relationship between couples in women suffering from rheumatoid arthritis.
Methods: The research design was quasi-experimental with a pre-test, a posttest
and 3 months of follow-up. The research samples consisted of 90 women
with rheumatoid arthritis participated in this study through judgmental sampling.
They were assigned to three groups including couple-oriented group,
patient-oriented group and control group. The data was gathered through
Golombok -Rust Inventory of Marital State (GRIMS) that was filled by participations
at the pre-test, post-test and follow-up after 3 months. The inflammatory
marker CRP levels were also measured through blood tests before and after
interventions. The experimental groups participated in couple-oriented intervention
(7 sessions with couples) and patient-oriented (7 sessions only with
patients) and the control group remained on the waiting list. Data was analyzed
using repeated measures multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) and Post
hoc test through SPSS16.
Results: Despite the effectiveness of both types of intervention, the coupleoriented
intervention had more effect size (d = 0.20) compared with patientoriented
intervention (d=0.06) on the quality of the marital relationship even
in three-month follow-up. Despite the reduction of inflammatory marker CRP
levels in posttest, still there was no significant difference (F (2,87) = 0.33; p < 0.71)
in the levels of the inflammatory marker in pre and posttests of the 3 groups.
Conclusion: The couple-oriented emotional cognitive-behavioral-intervention
can be used as an effective intervention to improve marital state in patients
with rheumatoid arthritis.
Paper Type: Research Article
