Abstract
Objective: The purpose of the present study was  to determine the rate of satisfaction from physical fitness committees performance in province of Guilan.
Methodology: The method of this study was descriptive-survey type. The statistical population included the head of the office of sports and youth, all committee employers, coaches, referees, and  active athletes (175 individuals) from 15 cities of Guilan province. The questionnaires were distributed between all of them and 157 completed questionnaires were collected and analyzed. The measuring instrument in this study was a researcher made questionnaire. The face and content validity of the questionnaire were confirmed by 10 sport management instructors and specialists and 3 experienced coaches . Its reliability was also estimated USING cronbach  Alpha test as r =0/96. In order to analyze the data ,descriptive  statistics methods; Calmogroph and Smirnof test, one sample “t” test, ANOVA, follow -up LSD, kruskal  wallis; Spearman, and U-man Whitney tests were used with in a significance  level of p?0.05 employing SPSS software version 16.
Results: Analyzing the satisfaction dimension of physical fitness performance 9 factors were indicated and three of them like ,management- planning factor, human resources factor and scientific– research factor were recognized as important factors from all the subjects’ point of views. By studying the financial source factor, it was indicated that the degree of attracting allocated resources form city’s physical education bureau (financial & non-financial) and the received income from renting sport facilities given to the committee had the first and second priority and the most amount of affect on the responders’ satisfaction.
Conclusion: It is recommended that the officials and planners of the province committees use the available variables on management-planning factors, human resource factors, and scientific-research factors, consider the importance of governmental financial resources, recruit and educate skilful human sources, provide equipments and facilities for building structures and annual planning and present better services to provide positive innovations in the committees.
Keywords: Physical Fitness and Aerobic Committees, Performance Assessment, Satisfaction, Management and Planning, Human Sources

