Abstract
Objective: one of the problems that managers in sport organizations have paid less attention to is communication skills. Meanwhile, occupational positions are considerably influenced by our interpersonal relations. Approximately 90% of occupational failures occur due to individual inability to make appropriate interpersonal relations. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between  communication skills and interpersonal relations of sports managers in Guilan province.
Methodology: The population of this research consists of the directors of the Office sports and youth, the heads and Successors of sports and youth cities, the heads and Successors of Guilan sports staff that were 121 persons. All of the statistical samples were considered as equal to the population size and 99 questionnaires have been received. In order to collect data, two questionnaires, The Barton J.A. Communication skills questionnaire (1990) and The Siegel, Smith and Moska (2001) were used. The Validity of the Questionnaires were approved by 10 university lecturers of  Sports Management and the reliability of them also were calculated by cronbach’s alpha and as 0.81 and 0.83. Data analysis was carried out by using Kolmogorov-smirnov, Pearson correlation coefficient and simple multiple regression.
Results: Based on the findings of the research, there is a positive and significant relationship between the Communication skills of the managers and the interpersonal relations of the sport managers in Guilan province. The results of the multiple regression also showed that among the different aspects of the communication skills of the managers, speaking skill variable is more significant than other variables in predicting the interpersonal relations of managers.
Conclusion: If managers strengthen their communication skills they will find it more possible to communicate with other people, inspire their feeling, convince them, impress them, and finally assure them .So managers can improve their performance and succession in their management scope and assure their superior managers, colleagues and subordinates by strengthening and learning these skills.
Keywords: Communication Skills, Interpersonal Relations, Sport Managers

