Introduction
The quality of life is concept that use for drawing of society welfare. In fact the quality of life is reflect, the life's condition and welfare of people at various levels: personal, familial and social. The first environmental effect that a person receives is family environment, and even the influence of other environment can be derived from the same family. So can be said that generally the family will be effect in quality of person's life. This topic most appears in relation with kind and structure of family, where kind of family in the satisfaction of people especially young couples indicator quality of life had a different effect. On this basis, the main purpose of this study is evaluation and comparative of life's quality of extended and nuclear families in rural areas of Poshtab district.
Methodology
The study area consist of 9 villages of the Adimi and Ghaemabad Rurals in district Poshtab of Zabol.The statistical community including 113 extended family and 115 nuclear family that have marriage since 1385 year on wards. The these family have selected a random sample and whit the help of manager rural from 2 Adimi and Ghaemabad Rurals, district Poshtab of Zabol.The research method is descriptive and analytical, that primary data collected from a library, internet sources and scientific sites, and after survey the sources, objective and subjective indicators of quality of life for both of nuclear and extended family at questionnaire design and were distributed in samples villages. For data analysis have used of SPSS 16 and statistical methods consist of data frequency distribution for determine the percentage of characteristic respondents and T test for evaluation of significant difference in satisfaction of young couples at indicators of life quality in 2 types of family structure.
Results
Generally the family will be effect in quality of person's life. This topic most appears in relation with kind and structure of family, where kind of family in the satisfaction of people especially young couples indicator quality of life had a different effect. On this basis, the main purpose of this study is evaluation and comparative of life's quality of extended and nuclear families in rural areas of Poshtab district.

According to importance of quality of life in the welfare of people and the feeling of satisfaction individuals different aspects of life, in comparison done of the satisfaction from quality of life indicators at two different levels of family in rural areas of Poshtab part of Zabol, this result was that a young couples to live with father family and to form of extended, with young couples that was independent after marriage, make up the structure of nuclear family, in the satisfaction and feeling of well-being in relation to quality of life indicators did not much difference in the form environmental and facilities quality of the rural of live location, physical quality of housing (internal and external) and emotional well-being in own family and mostly had satisfaction from the quality of your life, listed based on the indicators. But young couples the two families had significantly different in connection with the two indicators of autonomy and freedom of action, mental and emotional well-being and did not satisfaction of these indicators.
Conclusion
Quality of life is means having the good life and a sense of satisfaction from it. It simply quality of life is reflects the living conditions and welfare of individuals. According to experts say, the quality of life can be analyzed in different units and levels of individual, family, community, governments and global level. On this basis, in this study, satisfaction newly married young couples was measured and compared from quality of life indicators in the form of five indicators (objective and subjective) in the two type of family same nuclear family (small) and extended (paternal) in the rural areas of Poshtab district of Zabol. Due to this particular type of family is the first and most influential environment in individual's welfare, comfort, healthy and performance, hence, during this study found that, the family structure has caused the quality of life of young couples in indicators of autonomy and freedom of action, below psychological well-being is And two types of families have been differ in satisfaction of these indicators. Certainly, the extended family (paternal) on freedoms and authority to young couples in the personal do work, is effective and decisive, due to compliance of parents and mental and emotional relaxation because of being busy and large number of family members. Also in contrast, nuclear family structure, because of small and low number, to provided suitable environment the point of autonomy and freedom to act (typically in the kind of dressed and going on party and...), mental and emotional comfort (rest and sleep during the day and night).
