Objective
In chronically ill children who are hospitalized, many mood changes occur. For
example, in children with cancer or renal failure, prolonged hospitalization and
chemotherapy can lead to depression. With the improved survival of childhood
malignancies, the effect of treatment on child’s psychosocial well-being becomes
increasingly relevant. In this study, we examined the prevalence of depression in
hospitalized children with chronic and acute conditions in Dr Sheikh Pediatrics
Hospital in Mashhad.
Materials & Methods
After receiving the approval from the Ethics Committee of Mashhad University of
Medical Sciences, we did this cross-sectional descriptive study, from April to June
2012 in Dr Sheikh Pediatric Hospital in Mashhad. Ninety children, between 8 to 16
years, were screened for depression. The sampling method was census. Children
with a history of depressive or other mental disorders were excluded.
Three groups of children (children with chronic renal disease, malignancy, and acute
disease) were evaluated for depression using standard Children Depression Inventory
Questionnaire (CDI). Two specifically trained nurses filled out the questionnaires at
patients’ bedside under the supervision of a psychiatrist. Depression scores were
then analyzed by SPSS software.
Results
Of 90 children, 43(47.7%) were male and 47(52.2%) were female. The Children’s
mean age was 11±2.3 years, and the mean length of hospitalization was 8±5.3 days.
Depression was detected in various degrees in 63% of patients (N=57), and 36.6%
of children (N=32) had no symptoms of depression. Severe depression was not seen
in any of the patients with acute illness. More than half of patients with cancer and
chronic kidney disease had moderate to severe depression.
There was a significant statistical relationship between the duration of illness and
severity of depression. There was also a significant correlation between severity of
depression and frequency of hospitalization. Children who had been hospitalized
more than 3 times in the previous year, experienced more severe levels of depression.
We also found a significant correlation between pubertal age and severity of
depression in patients with cancers and chronic renal failure.
Conclusion
Children who are hospitalized due to chronic conditions are at a higher risk for
mood disorders in comparison with the ones with acute conditions. It is therefore
advisable to consider more practical plans to improve the care for hospitalized
children’s mental health.
