Natural materials of biological origin degrade over time and may emit odorous chemical compounds that can influence the perceived indoor air quality. The objective of this study was to investigate how the perceived air quality is influenced by emissions from building products with linseed oil compared with similar conventional synthetic products without linseed oil. Two types of linoleum, two types of wall paint and two types of floor oil were selected as examples of natural products containing linseed oil. The selected synthetic products were PVC floor covering, a water-based paint, and a synthetic floor oil. The emissions from the products were monitored over a one-year period in small ventilated test chambers. The odorous emissions were evaluated by sensory panel assessments of odour intensity and acceptability and by chemical analysis of the odour-active volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and carbonyl compounds. Odour-active VOCs in the emissions from one floor oil with linseed oil and two pure linseed oils were detected by gas chromatography combined with olfactometry (GC-O) and attempted identified with mass spectrometry (MS). The products with linseed oil influenced the perceived air quality more negatively than the similar synthetic products and the odour was persistent over time. It was found that the products with linseed oil did not qualify for the Danish Indoor Climate Label, because of the persistency of the odour. The results of the GC-O/MS investigations and VOC measurements indicated that an almost constant emission of odour-active VOCs with low odour thresholds resulted in the persistency of the odour. The VOCs probably originated from oxidation products from the linseed oil used as raw material. The study indicates that the acceptability of the emissions from the floor oil was influenced by the linseed oil used as raw material. It is therefore suggested that systematic use of less odorous linseed oils may improve the acceptability of the emission from products with linseed oils. The applied combination of sensory assessment of perceived air quality and GC-O/MS seems to be a useful approach in the effort to eliminate unwanted odours from building products.
