Design and operating conditions of large size mechanical flotation cells were evaluated by comparing it with the actual operating conditions in a plant. The objective was to determine the time scale-up factor, typically based on empirical rules. Experiments were conducted on the rougher flotation circuit at Minera Escondida Ltd. The circuit consisted of self-aerated mechanical cells of 160 m3, arranged in six parallel banks with nine cells each.

ugher circuit flotation kinetics was evaluated from direct sampling and local mass balances around each cell of the bank. Adjusted overall mass balances were also developed. This information was used to fit different kinetic flotation models, and it was found that the rectangular distribution function was the most appropriate to describe the distributed rate constant for industrial operation. Then, a rougher flotation simulator was developed to describe the actual operation in terms of the operating variables (mass flow rate, solid percentage, feed grade) and the actual volumetric flow rate entering to each cell. In this study feed pulp samples were taken in parallel from the rougher circuit and were simultaneously floated in laboratory. The kinetic behavior was then modeled at a laboratory batch scale in order to determine the time scale-up factor between laboratory batch flotation data and industrial size flotation. The time scale-up factor observed for large sized cells, 160 m3, was found reasonably similar to those previously determined for self-aerated mechanical cells, but of lower size, operating at similar recoveries. In addition, the relative effect of mixing, between laboratory batch and an industrial flotation bank was quantified by the ϕ parameter, separating the impact that kinetic and mixing changes have on the time scale-up factor.

eral, the rougher flotation operation was found to reach the predicted metallurgical target, and that the optimal separability criterion was also respected.

agnostic generates information about the internal state of the process and helps to identify potential improvements for design, operation and control of the circuit.
