Objective: Genetic modification of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) is critical for
their extensive use as a fundamental tool for cell therapy and basic research. Despite
the fact that various methods such as lipofection and electroporation have been applied
to transfer the gene of interest (GOI) into the target cell line, however, there are few reports
that compare all parameters, which influence transfection efficiency. In this study,
we examine all parameters that affect the efficiency of electroporation and lipofection for
transient and long-term gene expression in three different cell lines to introduce the best
method and determinant factor.
Materials and Methods: In this experimental study, both electroporation and lipofection
approaches were employed for genetic modification. pCAG-EGFP was applied for transient
expression of green fluorescent protein in two genetically different hESC lines, Royan
H5 (XX) and Royan H6 (XY), as well as human foreskin fibroblasts (hFF). For long-term
EGFP expression VASA and OLIG2 promoters (germ cell and motoneuron specific genes,
respectively), were isolated and subsequently cloned into a pBluMAR5 plasmid backbone
to drive EGFP expression. Flow cytometry analysis was performed two days after transfection
to determine transient expression efficiency. Differentiation of drug resistant hESC
colonies toward primordial germ cells (PGCs) was conducted to confirm stable integration
of the transgene.
Results: Transient and stable expression suggested a variable potential for different cell
lines against transfection. Analysis of parameters that influenced gene transformation efficiency
revealed that the vector concentrations from 20-60 ?g and the density of the subjected
cells (5×105 and 1×106 cells) were not as effective as the genetic background and
voltage rate. The present data indicated that in contrast to the circular form, the linearized
vector generated more distinctive drug resistant colonies.
Conclusion: Electroporation was an efficient tool for genetic engineering of hESCs
compared to the chemical method. The genetic background of the subjected cell line
for transfection seemed to be a fundamental factor in each gene delivery method. For
each cell line, optimum voltage rate should be calculated as it has been shown to play
a crucial role in cell death and rate of gene delivery .
