Background: Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers among Iranian womenes and more than 7000 women get breast cancer annually. Heterogeneity of breast tumor tissues and their internal pressure reduce the response to anti-cancer drugs. Artemisinin is a compound achieved from Artemisia Caspian herb that is capable to selectively destroy cancer cells without any additive and any adverse effect on normal cells. Niosomes are efficient carriers in targeted delivery of drug delivery systems that cause to retention of hydrophilic drugs into an aqueous phase and hydrophobic drugs in an area outside of the layer of fat. Since the niosomes are biodegradable and non-toxic to cells, so they are good carriers for targeted drug delivery and reduce their side effects. 
Objective: To prepare drug formulations of artemisinin niosomal, determine the vesicles size and entrapment efficiency and investigate toxicological effects of these formulations on human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7). 
Materials and Methods: Reverse-phase evaporation method with Ether injection was used to prepare Niosomal formulation of artemisinin. For this purpose, a certain amount of span20 (span60), artemisinin and cholesterol was solved in ethanol. Then, the solvent was evaporated by using rotary evaporators. After that gellose phase obtained in this process was solved in Phosphate Buffer (PBS-pH 7.4) and then it was homogenized with sonicator. Then, the vesicles size was detected by zeta sizer and cytotoxicity effect evaluated by MTT assay methods.
Results: The mean diameter of niosomes in RPE and EI methods were obtained 267±5 nm and 220±3 nm, respectively. Entrapment efficiency in RPE and EI methods were 92.4±3 and 86.3±2, respectively. MTT assay showed that the cytotoxicity of niosomal drug was more than normal drug.
Conclusion: These results showed that using such drug delivery system has effective role in increasing the efficiency and reducing the toxicity, side effects and therapeutic dose of the drug.

