This paper first describes the nature and objectives of transboundary diagnostic analysis promoted by the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) in its international waters focal area. Transboundary diagnostic analysis (TDA) is a procedure intended to provide a means of identifying the proximal, intermediate and fundamental causes of environmental problems and threats in shared (multilateral) water bodies. A table of what the authors consider a priori to be essential elements for inclusion in a TDA is presented as a framework for a comparative analysis of completed TDAs. A summary of experience to date in GEF international waters marine projects is then provided as a basis for defining inconsistencies and variances among a variety of TDAs. Such inconsistencies are largely attributable to the absence of clear guidelines for conducting TDAs and inadequate specification of the content and level of detail appropriate to the formulation of GEF projects to rectify existing environmental compromises and mitigate impending threats. We advocate that the GEF develop such guidelines on an urgent basis as a means of improving the utility and comprehensiveness of TDAs. We also note that, in a number of cases, the issues addressed in individual TDAs and SAPs appear to have been “pre-selected”. Consequently, it is difficult to justify the provision of GEF funding because there is no objective way of ensuring that the selected issues are of any priority from either a global environmental perspective or the perspective of the water body itself. This adds further justification for the development of guidelines. Finally, we conclude that the processes inherently embodied in the GEF concept of transboundary diagnostic analysis have the potential for wider application. Therefore, should the GEF not undertake the preparation of associated guidelines, there would be considerable merit in the preparation, by another organization or group of individuals, of more general guidelines embodying the same concepts and objectives as those defined by the GEF.
