The main objective was to assess dune vulnerability—a reduced ability to adapt to change, which is of serious concern not only in Western Europe but on a world scale. A main root checklist together with two daughter ones were devised in order to achieve this objective. The main root checklist comprised six categories (site and dune morphology, beach condition, surface character of the seaward 200 m of dune, vegetation, anthropogenic impact and protection measures in place) and dunes were classified according to their vulnerability compared to protection measures. The Resilience daughter checklist encompassed dune erosion, sand input, sand retention, degradation by use and dune management. This was compared with risk factors such as obstacles to dune transgression and recreation. The geomorphology, aeolian, vegetation, anthropogenic, marine influences daughter checklist looked at 30 dune systems in the Gulf of Cadiz and assessed dune condition by a dune vulnerability index based on the above conditioning influences. Values for all checklists were expressed as percentages. Over 200 dune sites in Spain, France, Portugal and the UK were analysed by means of these checklists. Results confirmed that regional trends concerned with dune vulnerability could be assessed, although successful differentiation at the end of the dune spectrum (large sand sheets, e.g. Pyla, France and meadow formation, e.g. many of the UK systems) and at the local scale were muted. An innovative aerial digital photographic system was developed and photographs were successfully used to assess dune condition, anthropogenic impact on dune systems, etc., i.e. the checklist parameters and was used to modify checklist procedures in assessing regional dune degradation. Ca 70% of the checklist parameters could be obtained by this means. This also provided a photographic record of the current dune condition. Principal component analysis provided a strong justification for the majority of checklist questions and the approach and relevance of the technique. The enumerated techniques provide valuable tools for dune managers. Rapid assessment of large areas of coastline can be obtained at a low cost and the resulting remote sensed images can provide a permanent record of the condition of the photographed dunes.
