Introduction: The youth of today and tomorrow as manufacturers, our country plays an important role in the sustainable development of the country. In the rural youth are very important. Because they are produced in the country is very important. On the other hand, young people through the "career development" seeking social mobility and change their social status are somewhat unrealistic and utopian forgot to think about. But it seems some factors can encourage rural youth to live and work in the rural environment. Especially rural youth living in rural and prevents premature and dangerous migration to the cities. That's why one of the most important tasks of the government's awareness of the needs and desires of young people by trying to achieve this goal. Now the efforts of developing countries to preserve their employment conditions of rural youth in rural areas and to provide career opportunities for agriculture to provide jobs for rural youth. However, factors such as education, media and facilities in cities and gap between urban and rural areas has led to increased levels of rural youth aspirations and desires and even the tendency to be different. All these factors have left their migration the villages to urban by young people. This study was conducted to assess the fixation and life satisfaction of rural youth and its impact on participation in agricultural activities according to the descriptive - correlation method.
Methodology: The youth rural population of the city of Kermanshah were investigated using a multi-stage sampling, 250 person were selected as sample. Data collection was done by questionnaire that received its validity by faculty members of Razi University of Kermanshah and its reliability by alpha Cronbach`s 0.79. Data analysis was done by SPSS. The study of the nature of qualitative research, the purpose of the application to the facts and data processing methods in the investigation of description-correlation. Face and content validity to the questionnaire, 10 members of the academic disciplines and Measurement, rural sociology, agricultural extension and rural planning and scholars and experts and Agriculture Organization of Kermanshah line after study profound questions and comments questionnaire items were declared themselves after interviews with these people and discuss theories about the reform was necessary. Data analysis was performed using Spss. The descriptive statistics of mean and standard deviation of the statistical correlation and regression.
Disscosion: Our results indicate that mean and standard deviation of fixation of young people face to their villages was 3.65 and 0.46, respectively and mean and standard deviation of their life satisfaction was modest 2.90 and 1.03, respectively. The result showed Culture in the village accepted it and believe, that's the most important issues of rural youth belonging to remember. Youth participation in the agricultural activity included: Dismantling, transporting the product to the warehouse, segmentation, plowing and leveling land. The results indicate that young people in rural areas are still things that are very valuable to them. It is suggested that with respect to these beliefs, conditions and opportunities for young people in rural areas to maintain these associations, youth participation in agricultural and live-action are interested in the countryside. The highest youth participation in agricultural activities in the field of agriculture. So it was fitting that the young people in other fields-are involved, and this requires knowledge and training. As the results showed, rural youth, educational facilities, health services were moderately satisfied. Youth from rural facilities are satisfactory overall average.
Conclusion: Youth participation in agricultural activities, agricultural activities were assessed as relatively good. Linear regression showed that 43% of changes in the dependent variable (participation in agricultural activities) is explained by the two independent variables (fixation and rural life satisfaction). The overall objective of this study was to evaluate the satisfaction and sense of belonging to the youth of the village and the city of Kermanshah's participation in agricultural activities. As the results showed, the highest level of education to young people with education diploma accounted-up (5/34%), which indicates the fact that the later years, the level of education of the youth of the village at the bottom is located. It is suggested that planners and policy-makers in their programs cover the maximum attention to rural education. As a result, it increases the level of youth participation in agricultural activities. It is recommended that a condition be provided to the satisfaction of youth from rural areas and improved facilities and to increase the youth belonging to the villages. As a result, it increases the level of youth participation in agricultural activities.
