Salafi- Takfiri warriors of Islamic government in Iraq and sham –Daesh- who changed their name to “Islamic caliphate” after 29 June, 2014 A. C are considered a group of international terrorists gathering together with diverse geographical grounds from different Arabic, Asian, European, and African countries. The main purpose of Daesh is the renovation of Islamic government and domination on all vital areas and ruling based on religion with all the required principles and institutions. The superior thought of daesh is regarded as “war as the mere solution”, “holding weapon to encounter with liberal, laic, ba’th, as well as the Non- Islamic Systems”. The basic objective of daesh warriors is the renovation of Islamic decree and supremacy over the vital areas together with the execution of decrees of Islam with all its rules and systems. In this regard, daesh is considered a particular and traditional- ideological interpretation from Islam religion and it tries to rely on terrorist strategies and justify its brutal actions by referring to the belief and historical principles. 
The issue of daesh is affected by the internal changes of Iraq and Syria, fragility of military and political structures in these two countries, inefficiency of military powers in encountering with cherik actions and unsystematic wars, public dread, profound civil chaos, and the most important of all is daesh achieving to the new financial sources and controlling on the central areas has led to changing the mystery of terrorism into great shock and even probably into an international catastrophe. 
The main question of the present article is: “what are the intellectual and practical grounds of development of daesh in the Islamic thought as well as the disagreements and differences of Islamic dignified thought and daesh thought? 
The main hypothesis is that the intellectual and applied structure of daesh would be on the basis of the outfitted and ideological interpretation from Islam, being of historical and belief roots, material- humanistic sources, immense awareness of geographical- political elements and subsequently, taking advantage of the strategy of developing government. In this research, it is investigated the roots of daesh development, its intellectual- Islamic foundations, organizational structure and institutions, its status in the political plan of Sunnites, the way of organizing and making relationship with Al- Qaeda. 


