Sea-level anomalies (SLA) derived from the TOPEX/Poseidon (T/P) altimetry and inferred geostrophic currents within the northern Arabian Sea were examined for the period from March 1993 through November 1996. The primary objective of this study was to confirm and extend our understanding of the upper-ocean mesoscale variability observed in the shipboard acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP) data collected during the US JGOFS/ONR Arabian Sea Expedition (September 1994–January 1996). The accuracy of the T/P altimetry data (∼3 cm rms) results in an uncertainty in the altimeter-derived velocities comparable to the ADCP measurement error. Thus the T/P data provide a reasonable method for extending studies of the mesoscale dynamics for the region. Comparison of the T/P-derived geostrophic velocities with concurrent ADCP data showed good correlation, with an r2 between 0.7 and 0.9 and rms differences of 10 cm s−1. The T/P data confirm both the overall spatial and seasonal current patterns observed by the ADCP. The monsoonally averaged rms sea-level anomalies indicate a high degree of intraseasonal variation due to the generation of squirts, jets and eddies all along the coast, the variability of which increases in both intensity and areal extent during the Southwest Monsoon. The SLA data indicate a much reduced degree of variability over the shelf. The SLA-derived eddy kinetic energy (EKE) fields are consistent with those derived earlier from the ADCP data in both distribution and magnitude. There is a large increase in EKE to the west and southwest and to a lesser extent to the south and a large area of relatively reduced eddy activity over much of the eastern and northern Arabian Sea. The area of reduced eddy activity coincides with the location of the most intense portions of the oxygen minimum zone found in the northern Arabian Sea. The spatial scales of the eddies responsible for the EKE distribution over the study area range between 200 and 500 km in the nearshore region, decreasing to 100–200 km offshore. While there is significant energy variability in annual and semi-annual time scales, a substantial portion of the energy is found between 50 and 120 days, and the relative importance of this frequency band increases offshore. Spectra indicate a distinct break in the frequency content of the eddy field at about 15°N, with little energy at less than annual periods south of this latitude.
