Several workers have attempted to find out the possible origin of the “high amplitude wave trains” of enhanced diurnal variation of cosmic rays and to develop a suitable realistic theoretical model that can explain the different harmonics in individual days. The various observed harmonics of the cosmic-ray variation may be understood on a unified basis if the free-space cosmic-ray anisotropy is non-sinusoidal in form. The major objective of this paper is to study the first three harmonics of high-amplitude wave trains of cosmic-ray intensity over the period 1981–1994 for Deep River neutron monitoring station. The main characteristic of these events is that the high-amplitude wave trains show a maximum intensity of diurnal component in a direction earlier than 18:00 h/co-rotational direction. It is noteworthy that the amplitude significantly enhanced and the phase remains in the co-rotational direction during the years close to solar-activity maximum for first harmonic. Significant deviations have been observed in the semi-diurnal amplitude after the onset of solar-activity maximum. This leads us to conclude that the amplitude as well as direction of the first harmonic and the amplitude of second harmonic are correlated with solar-activity cycle during these HAEs. The amplitude and phase of all the three harmonics (diurnal/semi-diurnal/tri-diurnal) are not found to depend on the polarity of Bz component of interplanetary magnetic field for long-term variation. The occurrence of high-amplitude events is dominant for the positive polarity of Bz component of IMF. The occurrence of HAEs is dominant during the period of average solar-wind velocity, but their occurrence during HSSWSs cannot be denied. The possibility of occurrence of these events is more during the periods of co-rotating streams. The occurrence of HAE is dominant when Dst-index remains negative and this point is not reported earlier in the litterature. All the high amplitude events occurred, when geomagnetic activity index, Ap, remains ⩽20.
