Introduction: Symptoms induced by premenstrual syndrome (PMS) adversely affect the women in reproduction period and decrease their quality of life. In literature, it is a common opinion thought that PMS could be associated with both sleep quality and menstrual attitudes. However, there has been no sufficient number of studies to define in what ways the PMS symptoms are correlated with sleep quality and menstrual attitudes. The objective of this study was to examine the relationship of PMS symptoms with menstrual attitude and sleep quality. Methods: The data were collected from 183 nursing students at Health School of Artvin Çoruh University by using a correlational design. Voluntary students completed a questionnaire involving socio-demographic characteristics, Premenstrual Syndrome Scale (PMSS), Menstrual Attitude Questionnaire (MAQ), and Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI). Results: Average age was 19.9 (1.8). The study determined a positively significant correlation between score of PMSS and mean scores of PSQI (r=0.306; P<0.001), and a negatively significant correlation between score of PMSS and total mean score of MAQ (r=-0.317; P<0.01). Similarly, multiple linear regression analysis showed that PSQI total score (b=5.412; P<0.001) and MAQ total score ( b=-27.455; P=0.001) significantly affected total score of PMSS.Conclusion: The intensity of PMS symptoms is associated with poor sleep quality and negative menstrual attitudes. Determining the methods of coping with PMS and strengthening the young girls on this subject may enhance their quality of future life.Introduction: Symptoms induced by premenstrual syndrome (PMS) adversely affect the women in reproduction period and decrease their quality of life. In literature, it is a common opinion thought that PMS could be associated with both sleep quality and menstrual attitudes. However, there has been no sufficient number of studies to define in what ways the PMS symptoms are correlated with sleep quality and menstrual attitudes. The objective of this study was to examine the relationship of PMS symptoms with menstrual attitude and sleep quality. Methods: The data were collected from 183 nursing students at Health School of Artvin Çoruh University by using a correlational design. Voluntary students completed a questionnaire involving socio-demographic characteristics, Premenstrual Syndrome Scale (PMSS), Menstrual Attitude Questionnaire (MAQ), and Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI). Results: Average age was 19.9 (1.8). The study determined a positively significant correlation between score of PMSS and mean scores of PSQI (r=0.306; P<0.001), and a negatively significant correlation between score of PMSS and total mean score of MAQ (r=-0.317; P<0.01). Similarly, multiple linear regression analysis showed that PSQI total score (b=5.412; P<0.001) and MAQ total score ( b=-27.455; P=0.001) significantly affected total score of PMSS.Conclusion: The intensity of PMS symptoms is associated with poor sleep quality and negative menstrual attitudes. Determining the methods of coping with PMS and strengthening the young girls on this subject may enhance their quality of future life. 
