Areas of high nutrients and low chlorophyll a comprise nearly a third of the world’s oceans, including the equatorial Pacific, the Southern Ocean and the Sub-Arctic Pacific. The SOLAS Sea-Air Gas Exchange (SAGE) experiment was conducted in late summer, 2004, off the east coast of the South Island of New Zealand. The objective was to assess the response of phytoplankton in waters with low iron and silicic acid concentrations to iron enrichment. We monitored the quantum yield of photochemistry (Fv/Fm) with pulse amplitude modulated fluorometry, chlorophyll a, primary productivity, and taxonomic composition. Measurements of Fv/Fm indicated that the phytoplankton within the amended patch were relieved from iron stress (Fv/Fm approached 0.65). Although there was no significant difference between IN and OUT stations at points during the experiment, the eventual enhancement in chlorophyll a and primary productivity was twofold by the end of the 15-day patch occupation. However, no change in particulate carbon or nitrogen pools was detected. Enhancement in primary productivity and chlorophyll a were approximately equal for all phytoplankton size classes, resulting in a stable phytoplankton size distribution. Initial seed stocks of diatoms were extremely low, &lt;1% of the assemblage based on HPLC pigment analysis, and did not respond to iron enrichment. The most dominant groups before and after iron enrichment were type 8 haptophytes and prasinophytes that were associated with ∼75% of chlorophyll a. Twofold enhancement of biomass estimated by flow cytometry was detected only in eukaryotic picoplankton, likely prasinophytes, type 8 haptophytes and/or pelagophytes. These results suggest that factors other than iron, such as silicic acid, light or physical disturbance limited the phytoplankton assemblage during the SAGE experiment. Furthermore, these results suggest that additional iron supply to the Sub-Antarctic under similar seasonal conditions and seed stock will most likely favor phytoplankton &lt;2 μm. This implies that any iron-mediated gain of fixed carbon will most likely be remineralized in shallow water rather than sink and be sequestered in the deep ocean.
