It has been found that polyacids containing an N-vinylpyrrolidinone (NVP) comonomer produces a glass inomer cement with improved mechanical and handling properties. The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of NVP modified polyelectrolytes on the surface properties and shear bond strength to dentin of glass ionomer cements.

crylic acid (AA)-co-itaconic acid (IA)-co-N-vinylpyrrolidone) was synthesized by free radical polymerization. The terpolymer was characterized using 1H NMR, FTIR spectroscopy and viscometry for solution properties. The synthesized polymers were used in glass ionomer cement formulations (Fuji II commercial GIC). Surface properties (wettability) of modified cements were studied by water contact angle measurements as a function of time. Work of adhesion values of different surfaces was also determined. The effect of NVP modified polyacid, on bond strength of glass-ionomer cement to dentin was also investigated. The mean data obtained from contact angle and bonding strength measurements were subjected to one- and two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) at α = 0.05.

s showed that NVP modified glass ionomer cements showed significantly lower contact angles (θ = 47°) and higher work of adhesion (WA = 59.4 erg/cm2) in comparison to commercially available Fuji II GIC (θ = 60° and WA = 50.3 erg/cm2, respectively). The wettability of dentin surfaces conditioned with NVP containing terpolymer was higher (θ = 21°, WA = 74.2 erg/cm2) than dentin conditioned with Fuji conditioner (θ = 30°, WA = 69 erg/cm2). The experimental cement also showed higher but not statistically significant values for shear bond strength to dentin (7.8 MPa), when compared to control group (7.3 MPa). It was concluded that NVP containing polyelectrolytes are better dentin conditioners than the commercially available dentin conditioner (Fuji Cavity Conditioner, GC). NVP containing terpolymers can enhance the surface properties of GICs and also increase their bond strength to the dentin.
