Objective
estigate the structure and composition of ground orthodontic adhesive particulates produced under simulated clinical conditions and assess their estrogenic action in vitro.
als and methods
ically cured and a light-cured adhesive were included in the study. Specimens were prepared by simulating bonding procedures, covering the bracket base surface with cellulose films to detach the full set material. The adhesives prepared under this method were grounded in glass chambers with an 8-fluted tungsten carbide on a high-speed handpiece; a new bur and different chamber was used for each adhesive sample and grindings were performed on different days to avoid contamination of the room. The adhesive particulates produced were subjected to FT-IR spectroscopy for the molecular characterization of particles; scanning electron microscopy for the morphologic condition and structure; and X-ray microanalysis for the elemental composition of the particles. Amounts of the ground adhesives were immersed in saline for 1 month at 37 °C. Eluents from solution of the two adhesives were added to media of an estrogen-responsive cell line derived from human breast adenocarcinoma (MCF-7), to assess the estrogenicity. Positive (estradiol and bisphenol-A) and negative (saline) controls were used; all assays were repeated four times and the results were averaged. Estrogenicity data were analyzed with one-way ANOVA and the Tukey test at the .05 level of significance.
s
udy of the composition of particles revealed compounds related to monomers with no major differences noted. Significant structural alterations were observed between the materials studied, with the chemically cured adhesive having larger particles. The ground samples contained Si, Na and Al apparently deriving from fillers, whereas large Ba fillers were identified only in the chemically cured group, whereas no distinct molecular variation was noted between the set material and its corresponding particulate form. Both chemically cured and light-cured adhesives exhibited an estrogenic action through induction of the proliferation rate of MCF-7 cells (160% and 128%, respectively, compared to control).
icance
from the potentially hazardous action of adhesive particulate aerosol produced by grinding, composite resin particulates may act as endocrinological disruptors.
