Objective
ermine if the results of resin–dentin microtensile bond strength (μTBS) is correlated with the outcome parameters of clinical studies on non-retentive Class V restorations.
s
dentin μTBS data were obtained from one test center; the in vitro tests were all performed by the same operator. The μTBS testing was performed 8 h after bonding and after 6 months of storing the specimens in water. Pre-test failures (PTFs) of specimens were included in the analysis, attributing them a value of 1 MPa. Prospective clinical studies on cervical restorations (Class V) with an observation period of at least 18 months were searched in the literature. The clinical outcome variables were retention loss, marginal discoloration and marginal integrity. Furthermore, an index was formulated to be better able to compare the laboratory and clinical results. Estimates of adhesive effects in a linear mixed model were used to summarize the clinical performance of each adhesive between 12 and 36 months. Spearman correlations between these clinical performances and the μTBS values were calculated subsequently.
s
-six clinical studies with 15 adhesive/restorative systems for which μTBS data were also available were included in the statistical analysis. In general 3-step and 2-step etch-and-rinse systems showed higher bond strength values than the 2-step/3-step self-etching systems, which, however, produced higher values than the 1-step self-etching and the resin modified glass ionomer systems. Prolonged water storage of specimens resulted in a significant decrease of the mean bond strength values in 5 adhesive systems (Wilcoxon, p &lt; 0.05). There was a significant correlation between μTBS values both after 8 h and 6 months of storage and marginal discoloration (r = 0.54 and r = 0.67, respectively). However, the same correlation was not found between μTBS values and the retention rate, clinical index or marginal integrity.
icance
S data of adhesive systems, especially after water storage for 6 months, showed a good correlation with marginal discoloration in short-term clinical Class V restorations, longitudinal clinical trials should explore whether early marginal staining is predictive for future retention loss in non-carious cervical restorations.
