Objective
relate different laboratory wear simulation protocols for three denture tooth materials with clinical wear results of the same materials.
s
denture tooth materials were evaluated for which clinical wear data of posterior denture teeth were available: DCL (double cross-linked PMMA with organic fillers; Ivoclar Vivadent), experimental material EM (double cross-linked PMMA with organic fillers; Ivoclar Vivadent), and NFC (PMMA with inorganic nanofillers, Candulor). The clinical data on the three denture tooth materials (10 subjects for each material) came from clinical studies conducted at three different locations. The investigators sent the impressions to one center where they were analyzed with the same methodology and by the same operator. Four different wear simulation protocols were evaluated in a chewing simulator (Willytec) with integrated thermocycling (5 °C/55 °C) and 8 specimens for each group: (A) molar denture tooth against premolar denture tooth with 1 mm sliding, lifting, 5 kg load; (B) standardized conical ceramic stylus (ط2.3 mm); (C) standardized ball-shaped ceramic stylus (ط6 mm); (D) standardized conical stylus (ط2.3 mm) cut with a special bur from the denture tooth material to be tested. For the protocols B, C and D, the stylus slid under a load of 3 kg for 3 mm on the flat specimen without lifting. All the tests were run for 100,000 chewing cycles. The maximum vertical wear of the material and stylus was quantified on replicas of improved white stone with the etkon es1 scanner and the match 3-D software.
s
nking of the materials according to mean clinical vertical wear after 1 year was as follows: DCL = EM &gt; NFC. The ranking of the materials according to the mean vertical wear was as follows (ANOVA post hoc Tukey B, p &lt; 0.05): group A: NFC &gt; DCL = EM; group B: NFC &gt; DCL &gt; EM; group C: NFC &gt; DCL = EM; group D: DCL = EM &gt; NFC.
icance
he results of the experimental setup with standardized antagonists of the same denture tooth material against flat specimens were similar to the clinical wear results with a comparable relative difference in mean vertical wear between the materials. When evaluating denture teeth for wear in the laboratory, a protocol should be applied that matches the clinical wear results.
