International borders as lines which separate political entities from each other have a recognized importance and countries make  a great effort to control them. But the threats at the borders of the  countries are not removed only through the  security and  army forces at the borders, and here the borders’ management will become so important. Borders’ management includes the political, economical and civil activities and in addition to border line, covers the border regions.
Iran is among the countries which has the highest number of neighbors and numerous local factors and economical and political disorders in neighboring countries has caused a great deal of problems  for control and management of the borders. So that some borders of Iran can be called crisis pints. This issue is more happened in eastern borders especially at Iran and Pakistan borders. So that despite the efforts made by the relevant foundations in respect of the borders’ management, no desirable and appropriate actions are made.
In the current research, we study the effective factors on crisis and also management of Iran and Pakistan borders by using descriptive – analytical method. The objective of authors of  this paper is to answer this question that what are the effective factors on crisis at Iran and Pakistan borders? And which challenges Iran is faced with for management of its borders with Pakistan?
Results shows that border specifications including its History, method of formation and type of border in addition to the state management capability in Security field and cultural-economical specifications of the  border regions and cooperation of neighboring countries are effective factors in crisis and management of Iran and Pakistan borders. Weakness of local economy and culture weakness in border regions and non-conformity with dominant culture of the country, penetration of fundamentalism, terrorism in addition to bad conditions of economical and political features of neighbors are the most important challenges of Iran for optimal management of its border with Pakistan

