Objective
Approximately 5–10% of preschool age children are considered
developmentally disabled. Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) plays
a key role in the diagnostic evaluation in these children. Many congenital or
acquired brain anomalies are revealed with MRIs. Although the majority of
these abnormalities are sporadic but patients with subcortical band heterotopia
or double cortex syndrome have sex-linked inheritance. We are going to
present the first case in Iran from Ahvaz city, which was presented with
status epilepticus associated with developmental delay and finally diagnosed
as double cortex syndrome, because band heterotopia cases especially for
continuous or generalized form is rare.
A 4.5-year-old developmentally delayed girl was admitted for generalized
tonic clonic seizure attack of 1 hr, upward gaze, locked mouth, and urinary
incontinence (status epilepticus) in the child neurology ward. She had a history
of recurrent seizures that started as febrile seizures since she was 12 months
of age and had frequent admissions for having recurrent seizure attacks. She
was the only child of consanguineous parents with negative family history of
any neurologic problems. She was a product of uneventful term pregnancy,
vaginal delivery with a low Apgar score at birth who was admitted for six
days in the neonatal ward for hypotonia and cyanosis. At 4.5 years of age,
she had HC: 45cm ( < 3%) Length: 102 cm (25–75%), and BW: 18kg (75%).
She was able to sit, walk with support, speak a few words, and communicate
with others. A physical exam was unremarkable. Lab data including CBC,
blood biochemical, and urinalysis results were all within normal limits, but
the electroencephalography (EEG) revealed generalized poly spike-wave
discharges. A brain MRI showed corpus callosal dysplasia, generalized band
heterotopia, and polymicrogyria. She was discharged home with oral valproate
and regular outpatient follow-ups.
In the diagnostic evaluation of developmentally delayed and epileptic children,
a brain MRI is strongly recommended for accurate diagnosis of anomalies
such as neuronal migration disorders (band heterotopia) and others, because
appropriate therapeutic management, prognosis, prevention, and genetic
counseling for prenatal diagnosis are dependent on definite diagnosis of the
proband case. 
