Objective
Wharton’s jelly (WJ) is the gelatinous connective tissue from the umbilical cord. It
is composed of mesenchymal stem cells, collagen fibers, and proteoglycans. The
stem cells in WJ have properties that are interesting for research. For example,
they are simple to harvest by noninvasive methods, provide large numbers of
cells without risk to the donor, the stem cell population may be expanded in
vitro, cryogenically stored, thawed, genetically manipulated, and differentiated
in vitro. In our study, we investigated the effect of human cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) on neural differentiation of human WJ stem cells.
Material & Methods
The cells in passage 2 were induced into neural differentiation with different
concentrations of human cerebrospinal fluid. Differentiation along with neural
lineage was documented by expression of three neural markers: Nestin,
Microtubule-Associated Protein 2 (MAP2), and Glial Fibrillary Astrocytic
Protein (GFAP) for 21 days. The expression of the identified genes was
confirmed by Reverse Transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR).
Results
Treatment with 100 and 200?g/ml CSF resulted in the expression of GFAP and
glial cells marker on days 14 and 21. The expression of neural-specific genes
following CSF treatment was dose-dependent and time-dependent. Treatment
of the cells with a twofold concentration of CSF, led to the expression of MAP2
on day 14 of induction. No expression of GFAP was detected before day 14 or
MAP2 before day 21, which shows the importance of the treatment period. In
the present study, expression analysis for the known neural markers: Nestin,
GFAP, and MAP2 using RT-PCR were performed. The data demonstrated that
CSF could play a role as a strong inducer.
Conclusion
 RT-PCR showed that cerebrospinal fluid promotes the expression of Nestin,
MAP2, and GFAP mRNA in a dose-dependent manner, especially at a
concentration of 200 ?l/ml. In summary, CSF induces neurogenesis of WJ
stem cells that encourages tissue engineering applications with these cells for
treatments of neurodegenerative defects and traumatic brain injury. 
