Objective
Cerebral palsy (CP) is the most common cause of chronic disability that restricts
participation in daily life for children. Thereby, it is comprised of quality of
life. Quality of life (QOL) measures have been a vital part of health outcome
appraisals for individuals with CP and to obtain empirical evidence for the
effectiveness of a range of interventions. The CP QOL-Child is a conditionspecific
QOL questionnaire designed for children with CP to assess well-being
rather than ill-being.
Materials & Methods
Forward and backward translations of the CP QOL-Child were performed
for: (1) the primary caregiver form (for parents of children with CP aged 4–12
years); and (2) the child self-report form (for children with cerebral palsy aged
9–12 years). Psychometric properties assessment included reliability, internal
consistency, and item discrimination, construct validity with Gross Motor
Function Classification System (GMFCS) and Manual Ability Classification
System (MACS) was done. SPSS was used to analyze the results of this study.
Results
A sample of 200 primary caregivers forchildren with CP (mean = 7.7 years)
and 40 children (mean = 10.2 years) completed. Internal consistency ranged
from 0.61–0.87 for the primary caregivers form, and 0.64–0.86 for the child
self-report form. Reliability ranged from 0.47–0.84. Item discrimination
analysis revealed that a majority of the items (80%) have high discriminating
power. Confirmatory factor analysis demonstrated a distinguishable domain
structure as in the original English version. Moderate associations were found
between lower QOL and more severe motor disability(GMFCS; r = .18–.32;
p  <  .05 and MACS; r= .13 - .40; p  <  .05). The highest correlation between the
primary caregiver and child forms on QOL was in the domain of functioning
and consistent with the English version.
Conclusion
Content validity, item discriminant validity, internal consistency, and test-retest
reliability of the Persian version of the CP QOL- Child were all acceptable.
Further study of concurrent validity of this version is needed.
