Most of the rocks in Precambrian shield areas have experienced a complex structural and metamorphic evolution, processes which have a strong influence on bedrock quality. The properties vary on both a local and a regional scale. It is highly beneficial to know the variations in detail when exploiting the rocks for industrial purposes. The main objective of the investigation was to study the variation of rock mechanical properties in an originally more or less isotropic rock at various stages of ductile deformation. The rocks investigated were Paleoproterozoic and with ages of ca. 1.80–1.88 Ga, and the areas chosen for sampling were situated north-east of Lake Vänern (Kristinehamn; 10 samples), south of the city of Eskilstuna, South Central Sweden (5 samples) and south of Ödeshög, near Lake Vättern in southern Sweden (7 samples). The 12 samples from the latter two areas are described in this investigation, while the 10 samples from Kristinehamn have been published earlier (Göransson et al., 2004). A comprehensive study of various parameters of importance for bedrock quality has been performed on all samples, e.g. studded tyre test (STT) and Los Angeles test (LA), uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), ultrasonic velocity, perimeter measurements of mineral phases, and petrographic and chemical analyses. The weakly deformed and massive (more or less isotropic) rocks show a tendency towards better properties of abrasion (STT) than the strongly deformed rocks and this can also be said for UCS, reflecting the greater ability of rocks to split along foliation planes. This is not entirely unambiguous, as the more deformed rocks, such as the mylonites, may have varying properties. This depends on the combined effects of, e.g. grain size, recrystallisation and foliation. However, the brittleness (LA) shows somewhat better values with increased deformation. This may depend on higher amounts of dark minerals, as their existence does not affect this test as much as in the case of abrasion tests. The perimeter values of the mineral phases display generally higher values, i.e. grain boundaries for the more strongly deformed rocks are more complicated. However, the values for the investigated mylonites may vary between low and high. The lower value may be due to dynamic recrystallisation and the creation of triple points (static recrystallisation) making the rock weaker. Besides, the development of a strong foliation may decrease rock strength despite the usually finer grain size. The results show that it is extremely important to consider all possible variations of bedrock before classification and exploitation, as the bedrock material in fact is highly heterogeneous.
