Introduction
Hydatid cyst disease is a significant clinical
problem in endemic regions.(1) Cystic
echinococcosis is a zoonosis caused by
the larval stage of Echinococcus granulosus.(
1) it has an indirect life cycle, with
canines (mainly dogs) as definitive hosts,
and herbivores and human as intermediary
hosts.(2) Hydatid cyst disease in human
commonly affecting the liver and
lungs.(3) The bone involvement is rare in
hydatid disease and represents less than
2 % of all cases. The most common bone
localization is vertebral hydatidosis which
is seen in 44 %of the patients.(4) The disease
occurs by direct extension from a
pulmonary or liver infestation (5) or, less
common, begins primarily in the vertebral
body.(6) Hydatid disease of the spine
is rare and has poor prognosis, (7) in such
condition; the severity of disease is related
to the neurological complications.(4)
Paraplegia is the most serious complication
which is caused by compression of
the spinal cord by the cysts.(7) The
treatment relies on the actual surgical
removal of cysts although the bone involvement
is quite challenging. The poor
outcome of posterior decompression and
laminectomy for intraosseous spinal hydatid
disease were reported by several authors.(8) In endemic countries, prevention
and health education are the best
measures.(4)
Case Presentation:
Herein we report a 55-year-old man who
referred to our outpatient clinic due to
back pain and progressive numbness and
weakness of both lower extremities and
disability in walking. The condition was
per diagnosed as disc herniation. In
physical examination, the patient had low
back pain, weakness and paresthesia of
both lower extremities .In imaging work
ups Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI)revealed an epidural cystic lesion
extending from T6 to T7. Laboratory
analyses were performed. Total blood cell
counts, erythrocyte sedimentation Rate
(ESR), complete biochemical serum and
urine parameters, coagulation tests were
within normal ranges. ELISA for Echinococcus
granulosus was positive. Daily
doses of albendazole 400 mg (twice per
day) were used for 2 weeks and then the
patient underwent surgical intervention.
The cyst had been totally removed. Bilateral
laminectomy, medial facetectomy
and extra Dural cord decompression were
done. Cystic lesion was shown to be hydatid
cyst by histopathologic confirmation
after the surgical removal.
No neurological bladder, or bowel symptoms
was seen in the postoperative period.
The patient received antibiotic
(cephalexin 500mg four times per day) in
addition to daily albendazole (400 mg
twice daily for 3 months). Following 3
months of rehabilitation program his neurological
status revealed. He was symptom-
free after operation in three years
follow up.
Discussion:
Hydatid disease is a health problem in
the endemic areas such as Iran.(9) The
condition can easily be confused with
tuberculous spondylitis where tuberculosis
is endemic too. Misdiagnosis could
result in serious consequences. Spinal
hydatid disease is usually situated in the
dorsal region and generates medullary or
radicular symptoms according to its location.(
10) The symptoms present due to
compression effect of the cysts.(11) The
most important clinical manifestations of
the condition are paresthesia , paraparesis
, paraplegia and sometimes sphincteric
dysfunction.(12) Neurological signs
are usually very slow, but will result in
paraplegia in 25-50% of patients.(13)
There are 5 major groups of spinal hydatid
disease which may causes paraplegia
in the patients.:(1) Primary intramedullary
cysts, (2) intradural extramedullary
cysts, (3) extradural intraspinal
cysts, (4) hydatid disease of the vertebra,
and the last (5) paravertebral hydatid disease.
This classification was done in
1981 by Braithwaite and Lees.(14)
MRI is the most beneficial method in the
diagnosis of spinal hydatidosis.(15) It reveals
precise anatomic localization and
extension of the spinal hydatid disease.
Overall MRI is the superior method in the
diagnosis than computed tomography
scan (CT).(16)
On the other hand CT scanning may be
more convenient and advantageous in
follow up of bone lesions progression
which is associated with this disease.(14)
Cystic lesions require urgent surgery.
Although, medical antihelmintic treatment
(mebendazole or albendazole)could be an alternative for uncomplicated
uninfected hydatidosis. The major factor
influencing the surgical approach is the
degree of spinal canal involvement.(17)
In the report of Golematis et al (18) it
was shown that albendazole decreased
the size of the large cysts and in some
cases cured the smaller ones. The effectiveness
of medical treatment can be
evaluated with follow-up CT scan and
MRI which may show the gradual shrinkage
or calcification of the cysts in one
hand or maintenance of the cyst size for
1 year follow up in the other hand.(19)
Recurrence (30% to 100%) remains as a
major problem in spinal hydatid disease.(
12) It can cause persistent pain and
significant neurologic deficits. in such
cases a high morbidity and mortality and
poor prognosis is predictable. Albendazole
treatment which can prevent the late
recurrence should be started in the postoperative
stage and continues for two
years.(17)
