The global optimization problem is not easy to solve and is still an open challenge for researchers since an analytical optimal solution is difficult to obtain even for relatively simple application problems. Conventional deterministic numerical algorithms tend to stop the search in local minimum nearest to the input starting point, mainly when the optimization problem presents nonlinear, non-convex and non-differential functions, multimodal and nonlinear. Nowadays, the use of evolutionary algorithms (EAs) to solve optimization problems is a common practice due to their competitive performance on complex search spaces. EAs are well known for their ability to deal with nonlinear and complex optimization problems. The primary advantage of EAs over other numerical methods is that they just require the objective function values, while properties such as differentiability and continuity are not necessary. In this context, the differential evolution (DE), a paradigm of the evolutionary computation, has been widely used for solving numerical global optimization problems in continuous search space. DE is a powerful population-based stochastic direct search method. DE simulates natural evolution combined with a mechanism to generate multiple search directions based on the distribution of solutions in the current population. Among DE advantages are its simple structure, ease of use, speed, and robustness, which allows its application on several continuous nonlinear optimization problems. However, the performance of DE greatly depends on its control parameters, such as crossover rate, mutation factor, and population size and it often suffers from being trapped in local optima. Conventionally, users have to determine the parameters for problem at hand empirically. Recently, several adaptive variants of DE have been proposed. In this paper, a modified differential evolution (MDE) approach using generation-varying control parameters (mutation factor and crossover rate) is proposed and evaluated. The proposed MDE presents an efficient strategy to improve the search performance in preventing of premature convergence to local minima. The efficiency and feasibility of the proposed MDE approach is demonstrated on a force optimization problem in Robotics, where the force capabilities of a planar 3-RRR parallel manipulator are evaluated considering actuation limits and different assembly modes. Furthermore, some comparison results of MDE approach with classical DE to the mentioned force optimization problem are presented and discussed.
