Abstract
Introduction: Marital satisfactions are the key to strength the family and heighten the physical, mental health and economic development which could effect on life and job satisfaction.   Professional nurses are under various stresses during their shift work to provide excellent quality of life for patients. They have responsibility for their own personal life too. Due to multiplicity of nurse’s roles they suffer under several psychological and physical stresses. Understanding the factors related to their employment such as shift work can improve validity and efficiency of this force which is important in human.
Objective: This study aimed to determine the role of shift work and predictor variables on marital satisfaction of employed nurses through educational – medical centers.
Methods: In this cross – sectional study, 500 marital employed nurses from 8 training medical centers in Rasht were selected using stratified random sampling. 
Information was collected using ENRICH marital satisfaction questionnaire for demographic data, social and shift work. For data analysis spss16, descriptive and inferential statistical tests (linear regression, Pearson's test, Regression Logistic Ordinal Model) were applied.
results: Results showed that there is a significant relationship between marital satisfaction and shift work (P=0/003), history job (P=0/0001), personal income (P=0/002), the place of service (P=0/0001), employment status (P=0/0001), age (P=0/002). The findings showed each child can increase 1.65 times chance of lower satisfaction. Psychiatric ward was only ward related to marital satisfaction (p < 0.0001). But there was not significant relationship between marital satisfaction job degree, sex and educational level. 
Conclusion: According to this findings, shift work, and some occupational factors (history job, income, place of service, employment status) are related to marital satisfaction for nurses. Therefore, applying the appropriate ways and moderating factors to improve the marital and career state of nurses are essential. 


