Contribution is counted as one of the main pillars of expansion tools especially in developing of rural districts. The partnership process must be in voluntary, Villagers, and bidirectional form and should take the interactive state to itself. In extensional discussions various strategies is bring forth for increasing of people’s contributions in prosperity and developing of rural districts which one of the main parts of them is the formation of organizational institutions like nongovernmental organizations as a third part beside the private segment (market) and government (public) which has a crucial role in managing the society. For this reason in recent years the hamlets has been defined as a new administrative parts of villages till play its role as an intermediary among people and government. Hamlet aiders as rural managers and resource owners and noticeable authorities by having required motivations and skills can play much outstanding role in increasing of peopl,s contribution and rural expansion. The aim of this researchis to evaluate the performance of hamlets in direction of increasing of the participation of rural people.. The research boundary is 131 villages containing hamlets in Birjand County. The project sample estimated about the number of 312 with Kokaran Formula, information and data collection method has been done with questionnaires which its accuracy verified by specialist groups and also its permanency which determined by Cronbach Alfa test to the scale of89/0  indicates the acceptable versatility of questions. The collected data has been analyzed with SPSS statistical software and the results of coherence test showed that there is not a meaningful statistical relationship between hamlets operation and the growth of rural family contributions. And also the findings of T Students Test showed that there is a meaningful divergence between the villagers viewpoint and hamlet aiders regarding the role of hamlets in increasing social contributions. 
Key Words: Hamlet, Rural Management, Social Contribution, Practical  Evaluation, Brijand County.    

