Inroduction & Objective: Prebiotics, as a non-digestible food ingredient, beneficially affects the host by selectively stimulating the growth, activating a limited number of bacteria, and reducing the number of harmful bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract.This study investigated the effects of xylooligosaccharide on digestive enzymes activity, body composition and intestine bacterial flora of sobaity (Sparidentex hasta).
Material and Methods: For this purpose, 405 individuals of sobaity fingerlings (45 in each replication) were prepared with an average weight of 7.64 ± 0.3 g from the Mariculture Research station of South Iranian Aquaculture Research Center. This study was carried out in a completely randomized design with three treatments and replications in fiberglass tanks with 300 liters volume. Fish were fed with feed containing 0, 0.5 and 1 percents of xylooligosaccharide for a period of 42 days. At the end of the experiment, body composition and intestine samples were collected for estimating digestive enzymes activity intestine bacterial flora and body composition. 
Results: The obtained results indicated that dietary xylooligosaccharide did not change sobaity digestive enzymes activity, including alkaline protease, amylse and lipase (P  >  0.05). In this study, weak, positive and no significant correlation were observed between dietary prebiotic and alkaline protease activity, amylase activity and lipase activity (P  >  0.05). The results of this study indicated that different levels of prebiotic did not affect body composition including protein, fat, ash and moisture and intestine bacterial flora (P  >  0.05). 
Conclusion: Overall, this study showed that digestive enzymes activity was not affected by dietary prebiotic. Moreover, the diet supplemented with 0.5 and 1 percents of xylooligosaccharide had no significant effects on body composition and intestine bacterial flora of sobaity.


Keywords: Prebiotic, Digestive Enzymes, Body Composition, Intestine Bacterial Flora, Sobaity (Sparidentex hasta)


