Social sustainability is a concept that is largely in line with the dimensions of quality of life and Encompasses a wide range of concepts such as social development, social capital, participation, equity and belonging a sense of security and ... . Among the different aspects of sustainability, social mutual interactions have a vanguard and scouts role.  The social aspect  is important because every thing and every event occurs within a social context. Accordingly, the objective of this study was to identify the criteria and analyzing the social sustainability  in Iranian urban area. The case study is Sabzevar City in Khorasan Razavi Province.  The population of this city in 2012 has been 230000 persons. Research methodology is  descriptive - analysis method.  data collection based on secondary data analysis and the survey technic and descriptive and inferential statistics were used in data analysis. Statistical society of research is 19692 of families in 2 and 3 regions of Sabzevar municipality. Sample size is 382 families  that was chosen by random sampling method. The findings of this research shows that  in case study area, indicator of social sustainability has not been in a very good condition. Average of social sustainability score has been 2.85 which is lower than average of social sustainability i.e. 3. The most unsustainability has been on social capital, participation in urban affairs and sense of social security indicators and also the uppermost social sustainability on sense of place, spatial justice and economical enjoyment has been existed. Surveys also indicated that indicators such as social capital (0.516), spatial justice (0.294) and sense of place (0.192) have had the most importance role in social sustainability of the study area. More investigations indicated direct correlation between independent indicators such as type of dwelling owner and time of habitancy in neighborhood with social sustainability. And also, findings show inter correlation between constituent indicators of social sustainability such as social capital, sense of place, sense of social security, spatial justice, participation in urban affairs and economical enjoyment which this issue shows urban sustainability and special urban social sustainability need to systemic and holistic approach. With attention to the  important  role of social capital in urban social sustainability,  seems that it is essential for urban managers to with physical planning and urban space designing, participation of citizen in process of decision making and decision making in urban regions and neighborhoods, creation of urban council of neighborhoods and other policies create and improve urban social capital.   
