Objective: The aim of this study was to analyze the relation between Knowledge Management and employees Creativity in Physical Education Organization of Ferdowsi University of Mashhad. 
Methodology: The statistical population of this study was all the employees members of the physical education organization of Ferdowsi University of Mashhad (N=50) and the size of the population were selected as, the size of the sample. For gathering data, two standard questionnaires, driven from knowledge management (Lowson, 2003) and creativity (Randsepp, 1979) were used. Validity of questionnaires was achieved through considering the comments of professors of management and planning in physical education course and by using Cronbach’s alpha test the reliability of knowledge management and creativity questionnaires were found to be 0.90 and 0.92, respectively. The research method is correlational and has been done through field method. Descriptive scales and Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistical tests, Pearson correlation coefficient and regression analysis were used to analyze the data. 
Result: The results of correlation test indicated that there is a positive and significant relation (r=0.733, P=0.001) between Knowledge Management and Creativity. Furthermore between components knowledge creation (r=0.423, P=0.014), the absorption of knowledge (r=0.62, P=0.002), the knowledge of organization (r=0.391, P=0.024), the knowledge of stored (r=0.553, P=0.001), the knowledge of Publication (r=0.796, P=0.003), the knowledge of application (r=0.652, P=0.001) with creativity and positive and significant relationship was observed. 
Conclusion: Furthermore the results of regression analysis showed that knowledge publication is expected to qualify creativity. As regards that knowledge management has a significant role in improving employees creativity, the sports responsible should seek to remove barriers and provide the settlement context of knowledge management in organizations are and labor organizations have a role in improving performance over the past drawn attention.

