One of the main challenges of the ITER fusion reactor is to effectively remove large amount of heat deposited to the surface of the plasma facing components. The tokamak cooling water system (TCWS) will accomplish the objective of removing about 1 GW of peak heat load from in-vessel components while maintaining pressures and temperatures of the coolant within acceptable and safe limits during different operational scenarios. A study of feasibility has been launched for the IBED PHTS (Integrated Blanket, Edge localized mode coils (ELMs) and Divertor Primary Heat Transfer System; it consists of five independent cooling trains (four operational and one in stand-by), one steam pressurizer, supply and return headers, ring manifolds and connections to the all in-vessel components (i.e. First Wall Blanket, Divertor, ELM, Diagnostics and other Ports clients).

namic behaviour of the IBED PHTS has been investigated by means of RELAP5® code to simulate the response of the system during plasma pulse and baking operations. Due to the plasma heat deposition on the surfaces of the in-vessel components and subsequent increase in hot leg temperature, a large amount of water volume is transferred from the hot legs of the circuit to the surge-line of the pressurizer during each burn cycle. This causes rapid increase of pressure and temperature of the system and the following actions are proposed to counteract these variations: spray injection in the upper dome of the pressurizer from the Chemical and Volume Control System (CVCS) to reduce the pressure and active control of flow rates through heat exchangers and their bypass loops to regulate the heat transfer from the primary system to the environment via secondary and tertiary loops.

aper focuses on the prediction of the thermal hydraulic behaviour of the IBED PHTS during plasma pulses and baking scenarios, describing the various activity of the analysis, the geometrical assessment of the circuit and the modelling with RELAP5® code. The results have been compared with design and operational requirement. Possible strategies to enhance the system performances have been formulated.
