Anthropogenic modification of forests has often decoupled streams from riparian ecosystems and altered natural wood recruitment processes. Extensive research has shown that large wood significantly impacts channel dynamics, especially in small and intermediate sized forested streams where wood pieces are similar in length to channel width, and many stream rehabilitation efforts now involve the addition of large wood to streams. The primary objective of this research is to investigate the relation between large wood and reach scale channel morphology and hydraulics using a physical model, in order to better inform stream rehabilitation programs and future modeling efforts. Four experiments, each comprising numerous five hour runs, were conducted using a Froude-scaled stream table with wood loads scaled to 0 m3/m2, 0.011 m3/m2, 0.016 m3/m2, and 0.022 m3/m2. The addition of large wood significantly decreased the reach-averaged velocity in all experiments, and was associated with decreased sediment transport and increased sediment storage in the reach. Increases in bed and water surface slope compensated for the loss of energy available to transport sediment, and enabled the system to reach a new steady state within the equivalent of 6 to 9 years. Adding wood increased pool frequency, as well as the variability in cross-sectional depth, while causing the reach to undergo a transition from a plane-bed to a riffle-pool morphology. Retention of fine sediment increased the availability of fish spawning substrate, while increased water stage improved connectivity between the channel and the floodplain. The changes in habitat complexity were generally related to the wood load added to the reach, but were also dependent on the orientation and arrangement of the pieces. These results demonstrate that wood may exert a primary control on channel morphodynamics and the availability of aquatic habitat in intermediate sized streams, and suggest that the benefits from stream rehabilitation efforts are highly dependent on project scale. The relatively long time needed to realize habitat benefits demonstrates that long term monitoring of rehabilitation projects is necessary.
