Introduction & Objective: Jaundice is a common problem in infants in the first days after birth. Jaundice due to serious complications such as kernicterus requires special attention. The ob-jective of this study was to determine the prevalence and risk factors affecting neonatal jaun-dice.
Material & Methods: In this cross-sectional study of 579 infants admitted to the Imam Sajjad Yasouj hospital in 2014 were studied using, convenience non_probability sampling method. By reviewing data type and RH, hemoglobin, G6PD, direct Coombs test - total bilirubin, un-conjugated bilirubin was extracted. Gender, weight, gestational age, Apgar score, method of delivery, number of previous breast feeding and jaundice in infants were examined. Using SPSS software, descriptive statistics and independent t-test, ANOVA and chi score ,data analysis was performed.
Result: In this study on 3461 newborns, 579 infants (72.16%) had jaundice. G6PD deficiency in infants was 12.95%. In this study, the prevalence of risk factors for premature yellowing was  ABO incompatibility and G6PD deficiency pre-maturity, pottery hematoma, and RH incompatibility, respectively. Of total number of 579 cases, 58.2% were born through normal vaginal delivery and the rest through cesarean section and also 53.2% were boys and the rest were  girls. The most common blood groups were A and AB and the most common blood group  of mothers was O. The mothers’ mean gestational age was 38± 2 . Among infants with jaundice, 15.9% were premature (35-37week) and 3.45% (20 cases) suffered from neonatal infections due to their mothers’ infection during pregnancy. There was no significant relation-ship between sex, type of delivery, birth weight, Apgar score, history of mothers’ drug use in the birth prevalence of premature hepatitis (P >  0.05). But, a significant relationship between the frequency of breast-feeding, pre-maturity, ABO incompatibility and G6PD and jaundice was found (P < 0.05).
Conclusion: The prevalence of hepatitis was 16.72%, largely due to ABO incompatibility and G6PD deficiency. It is recommended to determine the infants’ blood group (especially infants of mothers with blood group O) and measure neonatal bilirubin to prevent injury in infants who are at risk.
(Sci J Hamadan Univ Med Sci 2015; 22 (4):346-352)
