Introduction & Objective: Diarrhea is the most common cause of morbidity and mortality in all age groups, especially children, the elderly and immunocompromised patients. Various studies have been reported regarding the relationship between the children acute diarrhea and Aeromonashydrophila and Yersinia enterocolitica. This study aimed to investigate the preva-lence of the bacteria and their sensitivity to common antibiotics and the prevalence of viru-lence genes in the bacteria in Hamadan, Iran.
Materials & Methods: In this study, 120 stool samples collected from children less than 10 years of age with acute diarrhea were examined for Aeromonashydrophila and Yersinia enterocolitica. Identification of the bacteria was performed by biochemical reactions and PCR using 16S rRNA genes. Moreover, the prevalence of virulence genes earA and hyl of Aeromonashydrophila and ail and ystB genes of Yersinia enterocolitica were investigated us-ing PCR. Antibiotic susceptibility of isolated bacteria was performed by disk diffusion meth-od. 
Results:  Out of 120 stool samples, 2 (1.7 %) Aeromonashydrophila and 3 (2.5%) Yersinia enterocolitica were isolated. All isolates of Aeromonashydrophila were sensitive to the chlo-ramphenicol, co-trimoxazole, gentamicin, meropenem, amikacin and 50% of isolates were sensitive to the ceftriaxone and azithromycin. All Aeromonashydrophila isolates were resistant to erythromycin. All isolates of Yersinia enterocolitica were sensitive to the chloramphenicol, co-trimoxazole and meropenem. The 33.3% of the isolates were sensitive to gentamicin and amikacin and 66.6% of them were susceptible to ceftriaxone. However, all of Yersinia enterocolitica isolates were resistant to erythromycin and azithromycin. The prevalence aerA and hyl genes in Aeromonashydrophila were reported 100% and 50%, respectively. The prevalence of ail and ystB genes in Yersinia enterocolitica was reported as 66.6%.
Conclusions: Identification and analysis of Aeromonashydrophila and Yersinia enterocolitica in diarrhea of children has etiologic importance and presence of the bacteria in samples of diar-rhea should be considered.
(Sci J Hamadan Univ Med Sci 2015; 22 (4):338-345)
