Chute cutoffs reduce sinuosity of meandering rivers and potentially cause a transition from a single to a multiple channel river. The channel bifurcation of the main channel and the mouth of the incipient chute channel controls sediment and flow partitioning and development of the chute. Recent channel bifurcation models suggest that upstream bend radius, gradient advantage, inlet step, and upstream sediment supply at the bifurcation are important factors in the evolution of bifurcations. Our objective is to unravel the relative importance of these factors for chute cutoff success and development. We compare results from a morphodynamic three-dimensional (3D) model and a one-dimensional (1D) model with nodal-point relation with field observations of chute cutoffs in a meandering gravel-bed river. The balance between increased gradient advantage and flow curvature upstream of the chute channel bifurcation was systematically investigated with the 1D model. The 3D model runs and the field observations show the development of two types of chute cutoffs: a scroll-slough cutoff and a bend cutoff. The morphodynamic 3D model demonstrates that chutes are initiated when flow depth exceeds the floodplain elevation. Overbank flow and a significant gradient advantage result in a bend cutoff. The outcome of the 1D model shows that channel curvature at the bifurcation determines the success or failure of the chute cutoff when the chute channel is located at the inner bend, as in the case of scroll-slough cutoffs. We conclude that chute initiation depends on floodplain characteristics, i.e., floodplain elevation, sediment composition, and the presence of vegetation. Chute cutoff success or failure is determined by the dynamics just upstream of the channel bifurcation and location of the chute channel in the bend, which determines channel curvature and gradient advantage. These findings have ramifications for the prediction of chute cutoff in a wide range of rivers under natural and managed conditions and for the understanding of stratigraphy and architecture of deposits.
