Introduction: Hospital portals, as the first virtual entry, play an important role in connecting people with hospital and also presenting
hospital virtual services. The main purpose of this article was to suggest a conceptual model to improve Tehran private hospital portals.
The suggested model can be used by all the health portals that are in the same circumstances and all the health portals which are in
progress.
Method: This is a practical research, using evaluative survey research method. Research population includes all the private hospital
portals in Tehran, 34 portals, and ten top international hospital portals. Data gathering tool used in this research was a researcher-made
checklist including 14 criteria and 77 sub-criteria with their weight score. In fact, objective observation with the mentioned checklist
was used to gather information. Descriptive statistics were used to analyze the data and tables and graphs were used to present the
organized data. Also, data were analyzed using independent t-test. Conceptual modeling technique was used to design the model and
demonstration method was used to evaluate the proposed model. In this regard, SPSS statistical software was used to perform the tests.
Results:The comparative study between the two groups of portals, TPH and WTH, in the 14 main criteria showed that the value
of t-test in contact information criteria was 0.862, portal page specification was -1.378, page design criteria -1.527, updating pages
-0.322, general information and access roads -3.161, public services -7.302, patient services -4.154, patient data -8.703, research and
education -9.155, public relationship -3.009, page technical specifications -4.726, telemedicine -7.488, pharmaceutical services -6.183,
and financial services -2.782. Finally, the findings demonstrated that Tehran private hospital portals in criterion of contact information
were favorable; page design criteria were relatively favorable; page technical specifications, portal page specification, public relationship,
patient data, general information and access roads, and financial services were inappropriate. Also, patient services, updating pages,
public services, pharmaceutical services, research and education, and telemedicine were in a poor condition.
Conclusion: Results of this study suggests that an appropriate model should contain 2 levels with 4 layers.
