Applying social attitudes in urban problems is a new paradigm that gradually takes its place in the theoretical literature and in urban planning late 60s. On the other hand, the concept of quality of life in general and the quality of the urban environment in particular has become a major goal in both theoretical and practical aspects of urban development in the field of urban planning and urban design. Improving quality of urban environment is not only the most important goal in the urban plans, but also monitoring and measuring indices of it is one of the most important tools in the field of urban design, planning and monitoring purposes. Regarding the importance of  the issue of monitoring the quality of the urban environment today, identifying various aspects and factors affecting it can be steps to its achievement. In general,  there are two main approaches in the theoretical literature relating to urban environmental quality: One of these aspects focuses on the objective dimension of quality of urban environment, and the other one expressed by citizens regarding the quality, known as the subjective quality. Certainly, it can be stated that there is a direct relationship between these two concepts. However, it was proved in several studies, this relationship was not always a linear correlation. 
In fact, it can be expected in environments with low-quality objective quality, for various reasons, people’s satisfaction level is high and vice versa. The main concern of this study was to examine the root causes of it. According to this hypothesis, we supposed that the social capital of citizens has a greater impact on satisfaction of urban environment compared with the objective conditions of urban environment. Indeed, social capital creates higher overall satisfaction of life, and in particular, the urban environment will be concerned. To examine this hypothesis, we studied Panbeh- Rise neighborhood of Qazvin as a case study. At first in order to assess the objective conditions and subjective satisfaction (subjective quality) of the urban environment and social capital, indicators were explained. Then, based on these indicators the questionnaire was designed and across a sample of 311 residents of the neighborhood was distributed. Then, by using path analysis method that is based on calculating standardized regression coefficients, the contribution coefficient of social capital and objective quality of the urban environment on the subjective quality was evaluated in a path model.
The results indicate that the coefficient of the impact of social capital on subjective quality of the urban environment is equal to 0.45. The coefficient of the impact of subjective quality on objective quality is equal to 0.38. Therefore, the researcher failed to reject the null hypothesis. However, by Improving one unit in terms of social capital, it can be expected that the subjective quality is improved by  0.45 unit and with increasing one unit in the subjective quality, objective quality is improved 0.38 unit. As a result, this research shows the importance of improving social capital and the necessity to pay attention to this aspect in urban planning and urban design. In fact, the possibility of social interaction through various means must be one of the main goals of urban development plans.



