Automatic extraction of urban features from high resolution satellite images is one of the main applications in remote sensing. It is useful for wide scale applications, namely: urban planning, urban mapping, disaster management, GIS (geographic information systems) updating, and military target detection. One common approach to detecting urban features from high resolution images is to use automatic classification methods. This paper has four main objectives with respect to detecting buildings. The first objective is to compare the performance of the most notable supervised classification algorithms, including the maximum likelihood classifier (MLC) and the support vector machine (SVM). In this experiment the primary consideration is the impact of kernel configuration on the performance of the SVM. The second objective of the study is to explore the suitability of integrating additional bands, namely first principal component (1st PC) and the intensity image, for original data for multi classification approaches. The performance evaluation of classification results is done using two different accuracy assessment methods: pixel based and object based approaches, which reflect the third aim of the study. The objective here is to demonstrate the differences in the evaluation of accuracies of classification methods. Considering consistency, the same set of ground truth data which is produced by labeling the building boundaries in the GIS environment is used for accuracy assessment. Lastly, the fourth aim is to experimentally evaluate variation in the accuracy of classifiers for six different real situations in order to identify the impact of spatial and spectral diversity on results. The method is applied to Quickbird images for various urban complexity levels, extending from simple to complex urban patterns. The simple surface type includes a regular urban area with low density and systematic buildings with brick rooftops. The complex surface type involves almost all kinds of challenges, such as high dense build up areas, regions with bare soil, and small and large buildings with different rooftops, such as concrete, brick, and metal.

the pixel based accuracy assessment it was shown that the percent building detection (PBD) and quality percent (QP) of the MLC and SVM depend on the complexity and texture variation of the region. Generally, PBD values range between 70% and 90% for the MLC and SVM, respectively. No substantial improvements were observed when the SVM and MLC classifications were developed by the addition of more variables, instead of the use of only four bands. In the evaluation of object based accuracy assessment, it was demonstrated that while MLC and SVM provide higher rates of correct detection, they also provide higher rates of false alarms.
