Background and objective: Perchloroethylene is a chlorinated hydrocarbon used as a solvent in many industries and services activities such as dry cleaning and auto industry as degreasing. We carried out a bioassay using Daphnia Magna in order to determine the ecological effects of wastewater treatment through applying advanced oxidation processes (ultrasonic, ultraviolet irradiation and hydrogen peroxide processes) for removal of perchloroethylene. Materials and Methods: Due to the sensitivity of Daphnia and reports indicating this species is the most sensitive aquatic invertebrate to a variety of organic compounds, toxicity of perchloroethylene and its intermediate degradation products during applying different processes was tested using Daphnia. Lethal concentration (LC50) and toxic units (TU) were determined. In to determine toxicity of perchloroethylene, its stock solution was prepared at a concentration of 100 mg/L. Then, nine samples each containing 0 (control), 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 75, and 100% by volume of the primary stock solution were prepared. To determine the toxicity of the intermediate products of perchloroethylene by ultrasonic, photolysis, photolysis with hydrogen peroxide and photosonic processes, an initial concentration of perchloroethylene for each reactor (100 mg/L) was taken. All experiments were carried out at the Laboratory of Microbiology, Faculty of Health, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Iran. Results: It was found that the 24 h LC50 for perchloroethylene on Daphnia Magna was 35.51 mg /L. The 48 h, 72 h and 96 h LC50 of perchloroethylene were 28.058, 21.033, and 19.27 mg/L respectively. Toxicity of perchloroethylene was decreased after oxidation processes. Conclusion: The toxicity after hybrid processes was lower than the single processes. The toxicity reduction was the same during all time period. Hence, the hypothesis of reducing toxicity of the intermediate products of perchloroethylene degradation after the abovementioned processes is acceptable. It is noteworthy that although there are different intermediate compounds in the effluent of various chemical oxidation processes, , but they are less toxic compared with the original perchloroethylene this may be due to the partially concentration of intermediate products that will decrease toxicity.

