Introduction: The importance of medical profession and the
role of the physician in society is no secret to anyone. Skills and
competencies in clinical practice are necessary for the medical
profession. In fact, in patient care, doctors require practical skills
in addition to scientific knowledge. This study examines the
potentials of medical school students in three areas of doing the
right thing, doing the right thing in an intermediate range, and
doing the right thing by the right person.
Methods: This study was done in a descriptive-analytical and
sectional model. The population of this study was all interns
of Shiraz University of Medical Sciences who were passing
internship at Internal Medicine, Surgery, Pediatrics, Obstetrics and
Emergency wards. About 100 persons were selected were selected
by simple randomization. In order to collect data, a questionnaire
with 12 questions was designed in two parts. The questionnaire
was approved by 7 Faculty members of Clinical Medicine and
Medical Education, and its reliability was approved by test-retest
method on 20 medical students in the form of a pilot study and
through Cronbach’s alpha (82%). Collected data were analyzed by
SPSS software version 14 using descriptive statistical methods.
Results: Results showed that within the inner circle, interns
evaluated their skills in surgery, internal medicine, and
gynecology wards, intermediate and at other wards as weak. Also
within the center circle, interns evaluated adequate educational
evidence-based training in the field of medicine, and sufficiency
of educational training in the field of clinical decision making and
clinical care as suitable.
Conclusion: According to the results, it seems that medical
interns’ skills in performing most medical skills are moderate.
So teaching students by new educational methods and workshop
techniques, using experienced teachers will be effective. The
use of clinical skills training centers and objective assessment
methods for the students’ skills, especially before entering the
clinical departments, is very important.
