Background and Objective: The presence of natural organic materials (NOM) in water resources affects its quality (i.e. color, odor, and taste). In addition, it leads to the fouling of filters and membranes and reduces water treatment efficiency during flocculation/ coagulation. Moreover, NOM reacts with disinfectants and produces byproducts (DBPs), which are harmful to human health. Magnetic nanoparticles have been reported as effective adsorbents for the removal of pollutants from the aqueous media. In this study, we applied SiO2coating on these nanoparticles in order to enhance their stability and dispersion in aqueous media and investigated their capability in NOM adsorption from water. Materials and Methods: Iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles were prepared by co-precipitation. Then, we added Tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) to the solution in order to coat it with SiO2 . The adsorbent characteristics were determined by SEM and XRD. Then, we carried out the adsorption experiments under different pH(3-12) and contact time (5-240 min)performance conditions. The adsorption kinetic was determined with respect to different Humic acid adsorption times. Later, we determined the effect of different concentrations of adsorbent on different concentrations of Humic acid, and Langmuir and Freundlich coefficients based on the optimum conditions. Results: The morphology investigation of adsorbent showed the average size of Fe3O4/SiO2nanoparticles was 30-130 nm. The pH value of 10.5 and the contact time of 90 min at room temperature were determined as optimum conditions for removal of humic acid using Fe3O4/SiO2 nanoparticles. The maximum adsorption capacity of Fe3O4/SiO2 was192.30. The adsorption isotherm was fitted well by Langmuir model (R2>0.90) and the pseudo-second order model (R2>0.98) could better explain humic acid adsorption. Conclusion: Having high number of active surface sites, magnetic properties, easily separation using magnetic field, and its cost-effectiveness, the Fe3O4/SiO2 nanoparticles could be used as an efficient adsorbent in removal of humic acid from water.

