Urban landscape is a dynamic and changing phenomenon and such changes are subject to different social and cultural conditions. Religion is one of the main factors that play an effective role on the changes in the city. As a phenomenon, religion is one of the cultural and social roots that trigger changes and differentiations between different places. Alike natural and built environment, religion and religious ceremonies are effective in development of beliefs, traditions, and customs through influencing the living environment. The age-old gravity of cultural-religious ceremonies in Iranian cities and the lack of pertinent architectural studies on religious ceremonies and its effect on urban landscape explain the reason for doing the present study. It is noticeable, that the not so many studies with pertinent subjects have been carried out in the humanities field with emphasis on the actual content of the ceremonies as well as cultural-religious traditions; which makes their result irrelevant with present study. The main purpose of this study is, then, to survey the relationship of subjectivity and objectivity of the changes rooted in religious ceremonies of 10-day ceremony of Muharram in Tehran urban landscape. For further explanation, the city undergoes considerable superficial changes and such changes have considerable subjective effect on the people’s mode. The hypothesis of the study is that “religious ceremonies, like Muharram induce changes in urban landscape, which are both visual (tangible and physical) and subjective.” The study was carried out as a descriptive-analytical study and the data was collected through questionnaire and library studies. The geographical limit of the study was four urban district of Tehran (north: Gheitarieh; south: Bazar zone; east: Narmak; and West: Shahrak Gharb). The reason for choosing these regions was that they grab more attention of the organizers of Muharram ceremonies. Questionnaire and direct observation were used for data gathering. Sample society was 131 of visitors of the ceremony in the districts under study. Participants were adopted randomly. The questionnaire was designed based on Likert’s five-point scale. Reliability of the questionnaire was confirmed by Cronbach’s alpha. The data from the questionnaire was analyzed in SPSS using single variable and multiple Chi-square and Pierson test. The results of qualitative and quantitative data analyses showed that the majority of the respondents marked “high” for the questions “to what extent the urban decoration and view is changing during the ceremony?” and “to what extent the changes are objective and visual?”; and ticked “moderate” and “high” respectively to “to what extent the changes by the religious ceremony is subjective?”. A general analysis on the all questions showed that majority of participants in the study found the changes both skeletal and visual and at the same time with subjective and non-objective effects on their memory; while all noted the changes in urban landscape during the ceremony.
