Urban public space as a place where different groups of people that attend are required to consciously design that they can satisfy the audience. One of the criteria to provide the citizens comfort in this urban spaces is prompting environmental protection. Certainly security is not only influenced the incidence of crime and behavioral abnormalities that impair, but sometimes due to depict an unfamiliar environment and strained in mind, creating a sense of insecurity. That's why security in urban space can be investigated in two categories: physical security (objective) and psychological security (subjective) fit. In addition to the apparent benefits of increased security in cities such as strengthening the identity, vitality, efficiency and beauty of the space, the security has the advantage that in such an environment are more people attending. Also Live, work, invest and businesses prosper. As a result of the financial and economic growth will be higher and conversely, in unsafe places people and investors will be repulsive. In fact, in a public space should be designed in such a way that the maximum audience needs to be answered. Urban public spaces such as markets, squares, parks, streets and ... are as public spaces that a wide range of audiences face. From a variety of public spaces in the city, some of which are specific to the nature and location of the more important and are therefore expected to be of better quality as well. It is important to note that many factors in the security of the physical condition are the result of a civic square. Lack of proper lighting, pollution and visual disturbance, traffic and … are as physical factors that affect the security space. Hence, it is necessary to identify these factors and provide appropriate solutions to improve their situation. It should be noted that due to the proximity of public and private spaces, at any time of the crime extend to the private places such as shops, cars and houses there. The research method was descriptive-analytic study and through field survey of a case study (Imam Square of Hamadan) was performed. In a first step, criteria for assessing public spaces safe from internal and external sources have been extracted using a questionnaire, people's opinions are harvested. Total of 150 questionnaires were considered to be more than 6 times the number of variables. The more data the questionnaires were entered into SPSS software based on exploratory factor analysis, seven variables in predicting feelings of security, including the "walk ability", "aesthetic", "socialization," "night security" "direct supervision", "environmental comfort" and "the structure of environment" have been classified. Then, by using the technique of multiple linear regression analysis, the relationship between the seven factors has been examined in the field of security that Revealed 3 factor of "walk ability", "aesthetic" and "night security" in order to have the greatest impact. Finally, by multiplying three numerical values "factor loadings", "beta coefficient of factor" and "out of dissatisfaction" to prioritize measures to promote a sense of security is discussed in Imam Square.

