The issue of security is as old as humankind history, and its record is coincided
with the concept of community and society. Security, from objective point of
view, refers to lack of any threat against the dominant values in a community,
and from subjective point of view it refers to security feeling. It is noteworthy
that some sort of capital which is of high importance is societal capital as far as
security and security feeling is concerned. Although it is less than two decades
that the phrase "societal capital" is raised in social sciences texts, deliberate
consideration of the content and the core of this phrase, that is to say quality and
quantity of social relations indicates that antiquity of societal capital is not
bound to the last few decades, but in the contemporary age Jane Jacobs is known
as the one who has introduced the concept of societal capital to the
contemporary sociology. He used this concept to partially explain the fact why
some cities are safer than others. N=384 including 18 plus citizens of Qazvin.
The respondents have been selected through using Cochran Formula. A
questionnaire developed by the researcher has been used for this purpose, and
after being approved by the relevant professors and experts it was distributed
among the relevant respondents. Descriptive and deductive method was used for
analyzing the achieved statistics. The questionnaire validity was calculated
through using Cronbach's alpha (?=0.788), and hypotheses were tested through
using SPSS. T test was used to consider and review the research hypotheses.
The results indicated that there is significant relationship between societal
security feeling and factors such as kinship network trust in bodies and
organizations, religious beliefs, social contribution, neighboring links, and
making social and cultural norms. In addition the relationship between crime
and societal capital was confirmed. On the contrary, the relationship between
informal links and societal security feeling was not confirmed.
