Development measures in relation with urban projects require social considerations
and recognizing the issue of social security. According to the latest
studies conducted to evaluate social impacts, efforts have been made to identify
domain of social, geographical and environmental impacts of development
projects. In researches of this type, social security issue is neither a tool nor an
objective, but considered as outcome of development measures which are considered
long term and accumulative. Sorkheh Hesar development and organizing
project is aimed at converting the defenseless, prone to crime environment
near the city into a secure place for families to spend their leisure time.
However, municipality development policies aimed at meeting recreational
needs of the public and social services may lead to interference in changing the
area of the park and may bring about undesirable consequences for the park.
The consequences which may target social and security order, also may convert
the park into a delinquency center. This article while evaluating the natureof the project for equipping and developing Sorkheh Hesar Park is aimed at precisely looking into the social consequences of the project by using different scenarios. While stressing the two logic –based methods for evaluating social impacts, this research is aimed at using qualitative and quantitative methods to review the inclusion domain and depth of social impacts, simultaneously. To that effect, 200 questionnaires and 25 deep interviews are used to evaluate the achieved results. The results of the research indicates that security level in the Park has been enhanced compared to the period before development. The outcomes of the project have been positive and require considerations in the Park comprehensive plan and outlook document. The evaluation recommends prioritizing supply of optimal social security in the Park, Trans –regional, recreational and environmental aspects of the Park to its service and sector aspects.
