Abstract
Introduction: In present times health care organizations gather patients' information electronically
and on paper documents. The physical possession of the medical records is with the hospital but
the patient is the logical possessor of the information in the record so any access to the record
requires the patient's permission. The objective of this study was to identify the indicators of
confidentiality in the hospitals, ShohadayeLenjan in Zarinashahr and Mohammad Rasoul Allah in
Mobarake in Esfahan province.
Methods: This practical research was a qualitative study. Research community was the two
largest hospitals in Isfahan province, Mohammad Rasoul Allah in Mobarake and
ShohadayeLanjan in ZarinShahr in 2013. A valid and universal checklist published by British
Columbia Medical Association has been chosen as the data collecting process which contains 25
items in 6 domains. The validity of checklist approved by related professors, after translating and
performing corrections. The required data was collected through interview and observation by the
researchers. The required data was extracted, analyzed and compared.
Results: Principles of confidentiality related to printing, transfer, storage and revelation of the
patients' information in the records were on the whole followed by both the hospitals. Policies
related to confidentiality indicators in employees' domain were weak. In the studied hospitals
there weren’t any notifications based on awareness of the patient towards him/her privacy and
ways to access his/her information. Considering their work domain, the CIO (Chief Information
Officer) and supervisors of the hospital, define users’ level of access and allocate an
authenticated account in which they can change their password. None of the hospitals used
technical processes’ and controls. In both the hospitals in order to ensure security in local
network and preventing entrance of unauthenticated individuals the absence of suitable controls
were visible.
Conclusion: Considering the importance of implementing confidentiality indicators in relationship
with patients' information, it's necessary to apply new procedures and processes in both the
hospitals. The two hospitals assessed in this study had strengths and weaknesses. Therefor
considering the important points related to ensuring security and confidentiality of patients'
information is necessary.
Keywords: Confidentiality, Security, Hospital Information Systems
