Family is the first training environment for children. Although, during the time
family has delegated many of its functions to various social bodies, none of the
bodies have managed to fully perform its most important functions. The present
research aims at identifying structure and paradigms of relationships of
prisoners' families in Zahedan prison. Researchers are of the opinion that
children-parents relationship paradigms in family structure is an effective factor
in tendency toward social delinquency. The objective is identifying the role of
relations' quality and family structure, parents' surveillance; effects of parentpeers
are among effective variables in primary prevention from delinquency
commitment. Research is of survey type and has been conducted through using
a standard questionnaire and interview. N=341 including prisoners of Zahedan
prison selected through using Morgan table and assorted sampling. Basically,
social control hypotheses, child bearing methods, and Quernor paradigm and
Fitzpatrick have been used in this research. The findings of the research indicate
that 40 percent of criminals belong to procrastinating or indifferent families, and
34 percent of them belong to families with dictator parents. Lack of attention on
the part of parents and being ostracized and blamed by family and parents,
employment paradigms, and monthly income have direct and significant
relationship with tendency toward crime commitment among help-seekers in
Zahedan prison. The results of the research indicated that disruption in family
functions such as parents' addiction, parents' weak supervision, divorce and
continuous quarrels and parents' weak social surveillance are among the most
important factors which facilitate individuals' tendency toward crimes. Whereas,
social damages convert into social problems in case of their full-fledged spread,
and social problems in their own turn threatens the society social and mental
security in the macro level, and families and individuals in the micro level.
Therefore, factors effective in emergence of social damages should be identified
with respect to prevention-oriented approach, and should be removed, as well.
