Abstract
Introduction: Electronic Health Record (EHR) is one of the main applications of health technology that includes all data and information related to health care and the collected data are stored in digital forms.  Integrated access and representing of all patients’ data is the main goal of the EHR system and it improves clinical care and reduces medical errors. One technique for efficient implementation of the EHR is establishing the health information system in hospitals.
Objective: The purpose of this paper is to identify and prioritize the factors and criteria that affect the adoption of EHR in hospitals from doctors, nurses, and employees’ point of view. In addition, identifying the obstacles and challenges to the EHR establishment in hospitals is important.
Materials and Methods: The study was descriptive and analytical procedures applied to the population consisting of doctors and staff at hospitals in Rasht. Using a questionnaire, "evaluation of the staff and doctors of electronic health records" participants’ viewpoints were studied and analyzed. Gender, age, experience, status of implementation of hospital information systems and job categories were the different variables of this research study.
Results: The gender, occupational category and the full deployment of health information systems in hospitals had no effect on the employee's perspective toward electronic health records (P > 0.05), while factors such as age and experience had some effect on the implementation of EHR (P=0.006 and P=0.0001). In other words, with increasing the employees’ ages and work experiences, their opinions about the implementation of EHR are significantly improved (P=0.003 and P =0.0001). This is because when the employees’ skills are promoted, using the established EHR in hospitals and learning the different facilities and abilities of the system can consequently help develop their perspectives about the system. 
Conclusions: The obtained results show that the employees’ age and experience are important factors to the acceptance of the EHR in hospitals and clinic care centers. This is because a person who is involved in hospital jobs learns and sees the different facilities of the established EHR in practice and understands the requirements and adapts himself/ herself with the established electronic health records. In addition, performance of EHR implementation can be improved through education and raising awareness aimed at people who are dealing with the system.

