ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Frozen shoulder is a common condition, characterized by pain and restrictions in shoulder movements. Different non-surgical and surgical methods are used to overcome this condition. Given the high prevalence of frozen shoulder among the working class in communities, re-empowerment is essential for individuals’ return to daily activities. Considering the contradictory results reported by previous research, further investigations are required in this area. Therefore, this study aimed to evaluate the clinical findings of arthroscopic release in treatment of primary frozen shoulder.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study was performed on all patients with primary frozen shoulder, referring to Bahonar and Shafa Hospitals of Kerman, Iran. These patients were candidates for surgery due to unsuccessful supportive treatment. First, American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) assessment form (score: 0-100) and Simple Shoulder Test (a 12-item questionnaire) were completed before surgery. Then, all patients underwent arthroscopic release and examinations. The assessment forms were completed again within 3 and 12 months after surgery.
FINDINGS: Overall, 15 patients with the mean age of 50.57±12.01 years were included in this study. There was a significant difference in the mean score of SST before (10.21±0.98) and after (10.98±1.05) surgery (p=0.034). Also, patients’ performance at 12-month follow-up significantly improved, compared to the three-month follow-up (p=0.014). There was a significant difference in the mean scores of ASES test before and after surgery (p=0.007). Also, the mean score of ASES test was higher at 12-month follow-up, compared to the three-month follow-up (p=0.019).
CONCLUSION: Overall, arthroscopic release could help relieve pain and improve the range of shoulder movements in patients. Moreover, it could help patients return to their daily activities and regain their productivity. In fact, this technique facilitates simultaneous diagnosis and treatment of shoulder joint problems.
KEY WORDS: Frozen Shoulder, Arthroscopic Release, American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons, Simple Shoulder Test.

