Objective: The problem of runaway girls is one of the social problems which has become more prevalent and
is considered a serious challenge for families, welfare centers and governmental organizations in Iran. This study
aimed at determining the demographic, personality and psychopathology characteristic of a sample of runaway
girls in Shiraz, Iran.
Methods: Fifty girls who had escaped from their home and were referred to the Women?s Social Emergency
and Rehabilitant Centre of Shiraz were compared with fifty girls who lived with their parents (control group).
They were assessed by semi-structured interview based on the DSMIV-TR criteria, demographic questionnaire,
the General Health Questionnaire-28 (GHQ-28) and the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire-R-106 (EPQ-R-106).
Results: Mean (±SD) age of the runaway girls was 19.9 (±3.81) years. Twenty (40%) were the first child of
the family. Forty-three subjects (86%) were resident of cities. Physical abuse and neglect were more prevalent in
the runaway girls (P  <  0.05). There were no significant differences between two groups in history of major
psychiatric disorders. Regarding GHQ-28, only in social function subscale, the runaway girls showed more
disturbances in their social function compared to control group (P  <  0.05). There were significant differences in
extroversion, lying tendency, addiction tendency and crime seeking (P  <  0.05) between the two groups and
escaped girls showed more disturbances in comparison with the control group.
Conclusion: The social burden of runaway girls in Shiraz is of significance and this subject warrants more
attention from non-governmental and governmental organizations in order to provide more psychological and
social support for these girls.
Declaration of interest: None
Citation:Demographic, personality and psychopathology characteristics of the runaway girls in social
emergency and rehabilitation centre of Shiraz, Iran. ToubaeiSh, Nateghi, DehbozorgiGhR Sadr EsfahaniH.Iran
J Psych Behave Sci 2012; 6(1):33-9.
