Objective: To investigate the pharmacokinetics (PK) and PK- pharmacodynamic (PD) relationship of
methadone in a cohort of outpatients undergoing methadone maintenance treatment (MMT).
Methods: Sixty male patients undergoing MMT with a mean ±SD methadone daily dosage of 58 ± 34 mg
were enrolled in this study. A 5-ml blood sample was collected before the daily intake of methadone. As a PD
measure, the Subjective Opioid Withdrawal Scale (SOWS) form was completed immediately after obtaining the
blood sample. Blood samples were taken and the forms were completed 4-5 times more (up to 24 hr) after the
daily intake of methadone. Plasma methadone was analyzed using HPLC. Population PK/PD analysis was
performed using population pharmacokinetics modeling software P-Pharm.
Results: Significant decreases (p <  0.05) were observed in the SOWS scores during 10 hours after methadone
intake. The SOWS had returned to baseline by 24 hr after using methaodone (p= 0.98). A considerable
interindividual variability in the CL/F (16 fold), EC50 (3 fold) and Emax (6 fold) for methadone was observed.
Conclusion: Withdrawal symptoms were significantly improved in MMT patients after taking methadone
and the PD measure was substantially affected by fluctuations in plasma methadone concentration. However,
The SOWS had returned to baseline by 24 hr after using mathadone. Thus, a once daily dosing of methadone
may not be suitable for those MMT patients who experience a significant withdrawal disturbance in the latter
part of the interdose interval. This may increase the perceived severity of withdrawal and induce a craving for
additional opioids.
Declaration of Interest: None.
Citation: Shiran MR, Hosseinzadeh R, Hamidikenari A, Zarghami M, Lamsehchi N, Rafati MR. Population
pharmacokinetics and pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationships of methadone in a sample of Iranian
(Mazandarani) opiate users undergoing methadone maintenance treatment. Iran J Psychiatry Behav Sci 2011;
5(2): 53-61.
