The main objective of this research was determination and analysis of the fish consumption in the urban and rural areas, Markazi Province. The survey method was used to achieve the research objectives and the main instrument of the research was a researcher made questionnaire. The questionnaires were completed by visiting each of the research samples (Urban and rural households). 2525 number of them was assigned to the sample based on random sampling method. Cities were selected in the first stage by full enumeration (12 Cities: Ashtian, Arak, Tafrish, Khomein, Mohalat, Saveh, Shazand, Delijan, Kemijan, Farahan, Khandab, Zarandieh).  Frequency of the sample in each city is determined in proportion of the size of urban households. In this study 1455 people were studied in the urban areas and 1070people in the rural areas. A standard formula was used to estimate the amount of fish consumption. The results showed that the average of per capita consumption in total province is 5.81 kg, in urban area 6.70 kg and in rural area 4.62 kg/y. On the other hand, inflation and lack of local shopping mall near the workplace and residence are considered as the main problems and obstacles of the consumption level. Also, the satisfaction level of the price and diversity of the available aquatic, was lower than average in the market (2.2 and 2.62from 5). Regression analysis results also showed that five variables including education level, number of household members, price, income level and knowing how to cooking fish, explained more than 57 percent of the change in the consumption of aquatics (R2=0.57). In the end it is proposed that planning for increasing the levels of information and public culture, diversifying the methods and programs of the extension service and promoting of the fish consumption, expansion of fish distribution and production centers and assistance to cooperative activities and unions in the field of aquaculture marketing and adopting supportive policies for fishing community in order to promoting their welfare and ultimately reducing the price aquatic be considered by aquatic consumption and public health planners.
