Objective: Many studies have been published on the antioxidative effects of boric acid
(BA) and sodium borates in in vitro studies. However, the boron (B) concentrations tested
in these in vitro studies have not been selected by taking into account the realistic blood
B concentrations in humans due to the lack of comprehensive epidemiological studies.
The recently published epidemiological studies on B exposure conducted in China and
Turkey provided blood B concentrations for both humans in daily life and workers under
extreme exposure conditions in occupational setting. The results of these studies have
made it possible to test antioxidative effects of BA in in vitro studies within the concentration
range relevant to humans. The aim of this study was to investigate the protective effects
of BA against oxidative DNA damage in V79 (Chinese hamster lung fibroblast) cells.
The concentrations of BA tested for its protective effect was selected by taking the blood
B concentrations into account reported in previously published epidemiological studies.
Therefore, the concentrations of BA tested in this study represent the exposure levels for
humans in both daily life and occupational settings.
Materials and Methods: In this experimental study, comet assay and neutral red uptake
(NRU) assay methods were used to determinacy to toxicity and genotoxicity of BA and
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).
Results: The results of the NRU assay showed that BA was not cytotoxic within the tested
concentrations (3, 10, 30, 100 and 200 ?M). These non-cytotoxic concentrations were
used for comet assay. BA pre-treatment significantly reduced (P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA)
the DNA damaging capacity of H2O2 at each tested BA concentrations in V79 cells.
Conclusion: Consequently, pre-incubation of V79 cells with BA has significantly reduced
the H2O2-induced oxidative DNA damage in V79 cells. The protective effect of BA against
oxidative DNA damage in V79 cells at 5, 10, 50, 100 and 200 ?M (54, 108, 540, 1080, and
2161 ng/ml B equivalents) concentrations was proved in this in vitro study.
