Background and Objectives: Soil scientists have developed different mathematical equations
and indices to be able to quantify soil development and to organize soil data. Soil properties will
change during the soil development, which some changes can be made in the form of
mathematical relationships as soil development indices. In this regard, soil morphological
characteristics and laboratory data; have been considered by some researchers. Besides,
attention to soil micromorphology as a method which can be associated with evidence relating
to the sequence of pedogenic events and the processes which are not detectable by laboratory
and field data, provided other developmental indices. The amount and distribution of extractable
forms of iron in the soil profile are also indicated the stage and degree of soil development. The
main objective of the present research was the comparison of different soil development indices
(including forms and ratios of iron, magnetic susceptibility, color indices and modified Harden
Index) related to different soils located on Kerman-Baft transect.
Materials and Methods: Eight pedons on different geomorphic surfaces were selected during
field studies. All genetic horizons of selected pedons were sampled and were transported to the
laboratory for physical and chemical tests as well as magnetic susceptibility studies. The
magnetic susceptibility of prepared samples in both high (?hfbulk) and low (?lfbulk)
frequencies was measured by a Bartington magnetometer in soil science laboratory of Isfahan
University of Technology. Finally, the percentage of frequency-dependent magnetic
susceptibility (%? fd ) was measured. In addition, undisturbed samples were taken from a
number of horizons for soil micromorphological studies. The thin sections prepared for soil
micromorphological studies were studied and interpreted based on Stoops guidline (2003) using
a HP polarizing microscope.
Results: Moving from Kerman toward Baft in the studied transect, due to increasing trend of
elevation, more humidity was observed. That is why, pedogenic processes were also increased
and iron forms and ratios showed this development trend regardless of local conditions. Due to
effect of parent material lithology on soil minerogenic magnetic susceptibility, no significant
relationship between this property and soil development indices was found. Correlation of
various forms of Iron with three color indices of Harst, Torent and Alexunder showed that Harst
Index was better than the other two indices for the study area. Moreover, since the parent
materials of different pedons were not the same, the modified Harden Index was not adopted
with soil development trend.
Conclusion: Regarding the relationship between evolution and the age of the soil with various
forms of iron, increasing the crystalline iron oxides from soil profile number 1 (dry climate) to
soil profile number 8 (moist climate), represents a further evolution of soils.
