The main objective of the paper is the investigation of adiabatic shear band localized fracture phenomenon
in inelastic solids during dynamic loading processes. This kind of fracture can occur as a result of an
adiabatic shear band localization generally attributed to a plastic instability implied by microdamage and
thermal softening during dynamic plastic ßow processes.
By applying ideas of synergetics it can be shown that as a result of instability hierarchies a system is
self-organized into a new shear band pattern system. This leads to the conclusion that inelastic solid body
considered during the dynamics process becomes a two-phase material system. Particular attention is
focussed on attempt to construct a physically and experimentally justiÞed localized fracture theory that
relates the kinetics of material failure on the microstructural level to continuum mechanics. The description
of the microstructural damage process is based on dynamic experiments with carefully controlled load
amplitudes and duration. The microdamage process has been treated as a sequence of nucleation, growth
and coalescence of microcracks. The microdamage kinetics interacts with thermal and load changes to make
failure of solids a highly rate, temperature and history-dependent, non-linear process.
The theory of thermoviscoplasticity is developed within the framework of the rate-type covariance
material structure with a Þnite set of internal state variables. The theory takes into consideration the e¤ects
of microdamage mechanism and thermomechanical coupling. The dynamic failure criterion within localized
shear band region is proposed. The relaxation time is used as a regularization parameter. Rate dependency
(viscosity) allows the spatial di¤erential operator in the governing equations to retain its ellipticity, and the
initial-value problem is well-posed. The viscoplastic regularization procedure assures the unconditionally
stable integration algorithm by using the Þnite element method. Particular attention is focused on the
well-posedness of the evolution problem (the initialÐboundary value problem) as well as on its numerical
solutions. Convergence, consistency and stability of the discretized problem are discussed. The Lax
equivalence theorem is formulated and conditions under which this theorem is valid are examined.
Utilizing the Þnite element method and ABAQUS system for regularized elastoÐviscoplastic model the
numerical investigation of the three-dimensional dynamic adiabatic deformation in a particular body at
nominal strain rates ranging over 103Ð104 s~1 is presented. A thin shear band region of Þnite width which
undergoes signiÞcant deformation and temperature rise has been determined. Its evolution until occurrence
of Þnal fracture has been simulated. Numerical results are compared with available experimental observation
data
