  
   
   
   
   
      
   
  
  MicrosoftInternetExplorer4  Background and Objectives: Environmental pollution and health risks of dyestuffs
extensively are caused by many industries. Nonbiodegradability of dyes is
important so that different methods are studied for removing them. The use of
white rot fungi is promising technique in this regard. Therefore, objective of
this work is to investigate Rimazol Brilliant Blue Royal decolorization by
immobilized Ganoderma sp. in sodium alginate from aqueous solution.Material and Methods: This is an experimental study. First, the nutritional, environmental, and
operational conditions of decolorization process were optimized. Then,
efficiency of immobilized fungal cells was investigated. Experimental designs
were provided using fractional factorial methods and quadratic model was fitted
on decolorization data by MiniTab software.Results: Our findings
showed that type and concentration of carbon source, temperature, and pH were
the most important factors affecting decolorization and statistically
significant. Optimal conditions to 95.3 percent color removal were: glycerol as
carbon source at 19.14 g/L; temperature, 27 oC and initial pH, 6.26. Moreover,
decolorization efficiency increased from 75 percent up to 95 percent by improving
process and fungal immobilization.Conclusion: Ganoderma
fungus has suitable potential to decolorization. Besides, optimization and cell
immobilization can improve its capability. Application of experimental design
to research methodology is important because of decreasing in experiments and
saving resources. It is suggested to use these potentials in environmental
pollution control.
 

 /* Style Definitions */
 table.MsoNormalTable
	{mso-style-name:"Table Normal";
	mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0;
	mso-tstyle-colband-size:0;
	mso-style-noshow:yes;
	mso-style-priority:99;
	mso-style-qformat:yes;
	mso-style-parent:"";
	mso-padding-alt:0cm 5.4pt 0cm 5.4pt;
	mso-para-margin:0cm;
	mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:11.0pt;
	font-family:"Calibri","sans-serif";
	mso-ascii-font-family:Calibri;
	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin;
	mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";
	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-fareast;
	mso-hansi-font-family:Calibri;
	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin;
	mso-bidi-font-family:Arial;
	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;}


