Background and Objective: Collection and disposal of waste has an important role in public health. Isolation and separation procedures at the origin is considered as one of the most important and least costly methods of isolation and separation of waste. This study was aimed to culture and educate those involved in recycling and waste reduction in the Kalaeh City using two educational methods. .

Materials and Methods:&nbsp; This semi-experimental study was conducted in Kalaleh City. In the social and cultural context,&nbsp;&nbsp; Kalaleh was divided into six regions. Using cluster sampling, regions were selected randomly. In each area, 120 samples were used. The first group was face-to-face trained and the second group received training through the training package. Waste collection period was 60 days. After this time, the questionnaires were again filled up&nbsp; and the impact of teaching methods were investigated.

Results: Face-to-face training resulted in increasing waste separation from 70.8 (before training) to 95%. Whereas, this figure in the group receiving training package increased from 57.5 (before training) to 86.7%. Waste recycling rate was between 0.6 to 1 Kg per person per week. These wastes included paper, glass, plastic, and metal containers. On average, the waste recycled in face-to-face training group and training package group was&nbsp; 91 and 83 Kg per week. 

Conclusion: Knowledge, attitude and cooperation in waste separation increased after training in both groups. However, in the face-to-face training group, the knowledge and participation in waste separation was more compared with training package group. Continuous training and organizing waste separators could be helpful to re-use waste. It causes less pollution of the environment, reduce the transmission of diseases associated with non-systematic disposal of solid waste, reduce costs and increase awareness about the problems and issues of solid waste, and reduce the solid waste volume.

