1. INTRODUCTION
 A study of capabilities, particularly economic empowerment, and improved quality of life including initiatives and entrepreneurial programs, public access to equal employment opportunities and economic independence are so necessary and important that they are commonly referred to as basic human rights. Following the main research question, the corresponding hypotheses were formed: Which approach can help reduce the poverty and facilitate the access of women in District 18 of Tehran to economic welfare in accordance with the indicators of urban sustainability? Here, the hypothesis is that "economic approach aimed at improving job opportunities for women in District 18 of Tehran can be effective in reducing poverty and achieving the goals of sustainable urban development.

2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
  This research is based on many theories including sustainable development, gender-based theories, poverty alleviation and labor market theories (e.g. neoclassic approach, human capital, gender equity and empowerment). Each of these theories has been applied to conceptualize the study subject.

3. METHODOLOGY
 Given the nature of this study, document analysis (library, Internet) and field study (questionnaires, interviews and observations) were used for data collection. The level of poverty alleviation, derived from the 
employment for three groups of women, was determined using univariate analysis of variance (ANOVA) and stepwise regression. Accordingly, 200 women employed in District 18 were chosen as the sample population. The descriptive statistics (such as frequency, percentage, mean and standard deviation) and inferential statistics (Univariate ANOVA, step-wise regression and Tukey's post hoc test) were analyzed using SPSS and Excel software.

4. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
 The authors explored the effects of women’s employment on sustainable urban development in the study area, concluding that these studies can help eradicate urban poverty through effective administrative models and contribute to the realization of the objectives of sustainable urban development. The main objective of this study was to evaluate self-motivated programs and efforts aimed at economic empowerment, which plays an important role in the process of socioeconomic development of communities. According to the research hypothesis, the project of career empowerment of women can affect poverty alleviation and consequently urban sustainable development. There are a large number of researches and theories on this subject (such as: gender-based theories, labor market theories, anti-poverty theories, social capital theories, empowerment and sustainable development theories) attempting to determine the research questions and variables (career empowerment as the independent variables and anti-poverty project as the dependent variable). The results show that women who obtained higher scores in career empowerment are more successful in alleviating poverty compared to women with medium and low scores.  


5. CONCLUSION & SUGGESTIONS
Greater efforts should be devoted to facilitate the access of women to job and skill opportunities. Also, more public/ governmental investments should be made to improve women's entrepreneurship, promote the culture and prepare the ground for the employment of women in the society and families.    


