Extended Abstract
1.	INTRODUCTION
 Cultural development is on the one hand the underlying cause and reason of different dimensions of the development of community as well as the effect of the same dimensions. This means that the all-round development of society, to grow their own culture is helpful. The study objective approach to indigenous peasant subculture theory is Rogers; Efforts have been made Inhibiting factors peasant subculture theory of Rogers in the area investigated and the relationship of these factors as a negative factor in the development of rural areas is determined by the level of development.

2.	THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
There are several theories with different orientations in the field of rural development. One of the most important and pivotal ones in school modernization theory is the theory of peasant subculture by Rogers. This theory deals with the weaknesses and shortcomings of peasants' subculture. According to Rogers' theory, if there is no correct understanding of the values, ideas and motivations of farmers in social change programs, these programs will fail to succeed. The rural development program administrators should pay attention to cultural and demographic characteristics of the audience and program makers have to consider them carefully.

3.	METHODOLOGY
The research method used in this research is descriptive and analytical; to collect data, field (questionnaire), and library methods were used. The investigation was based on the households in the district temper Sokman Abad. To analyze the data obtained from the questionnaires, the Pearson correlation coefficient was used and to determine the level of development of the villages studied Vikor technique was applied.

4.	DISCUSSION
The findings suggest that the subculture of "family-oriented", "state dependence" and "Fatalism" in the village studied, and the element of "mutual distrust" Apart from the village Mamish Khan and the element of "good impression "limited exception Kalavanis and Mamish Khan rural communities are considered part of the cultural values. The subculture of "localism" and no waiver of future benefits for the immediate benefits "in rural communities were not part of their cultural values.
In the next step, using Vikor technique to measure, the level of development of villages were studied. The results showed that villages of Gildor and zive have the highest, and Kolus and Sonnat have the lowest level of development among the other villages. Finally, comparing the level of influence that the villages received by cultural factors discussed in Rogers' theory with their level of development revealed that the Villages that are less influenced by the cultural elements have higher level of development than the villages that are more influenced by these factors. 

5– CONCLUSION 
Since the findings of this study showed that the cultural elements of the theory of Rogers and level of development of the villages in the area are related to each other, to prepare appropriate basis for development in the area, social and cultural actions with an emphasis on improving the present rural culture are necessary. On the other hand, since there is a relationship between cultural development and other aspects of development, reformation and improvement of economic and environmental conditions can play a role in the creation and improvement of suitable substrates.

