Background and Objective: Soil properties continuously experience spatial variations in time and space. Heterogeneity may be occurred at large scale or at small scale, even in the same type of soils or in the same community. Spatial variability of soil properties is inherent nature due to geologic and pedologic soil forming factors, but some of the variability may be induced by management practices. Infiltration rate is a dominant process controlling hydrological cycle. Estimation of this process at an acceptable level of accuracy is important, especially in the case when it exhibits high variability. Awareness of the importance of these changes for increasing profitability and sustainable agriculture management is necessary. In this study geostatistical techniques were used to describe the spatial structure of final infiltration rate and select an effective interpolation method to predict infiltration rate.
Materials and Methods: From the study area 75 soil samples were collected by a systematic sampling strategy on gird spacing nearly 10 meter at surface. Infiltration rate was measured in the field by using double-ring infiltrometer until steady state (IRs). Three interpolation methods were used to estimate (IRs), which included inverse distance weight (IDW) with power 1 to 3, kriging and cokriging with auxiliary variables including silt content and organic matter. 
Results: Results showed that, the coefficient of variation of soil properties ranged from 7.26% (silt content) to 88.49% (IRs) at this field. Semivariogram showed that infiltration rate had a range of 24 m. The correlation coefficient between IRs and silt content, organic matter were positive and above than 0.2 that was significant at 5 percent probability level with organic matter, for estimation of IRs values at unobserved location. 
Conclution: According to the statistical parameter (MAE and MBE), both kriging and cokriging provided reasonable estimation as compared to IDW. However using silt content as auxiliary data for estimating of IRs in cokriging method could reduce prediction error by 14% as compared to kriging method. 

