Background and Objectives: Weeds distribution, their development power, less management, non-identify of weed, non suitable application of control methods, and unaware of farmers from new results in weed management strategy are the important factors in reduction of agricultural production. Weed distribution mapping can be used in correct application of different control operations and reduced herbicide use and increased its efficiency. Also, it can be useful for evaluation of management strategy in past and design of management strategy for weed control in future. The objective of this research was weed distribution mapping and flora of summer weeds in citrus orchards of Bandar-e-Gaz township by Geographic Information System (GIS).

Materials and methods: In order to identify flora and distribution mapping of weeds in Citrus orchards of Bandar-e-Gaz township, 101 orchards were selected during 2014, and the summer weed species were sampled and detected using a W method. With using specific formula of density, frequency, uniformity, abundance of each weed species was calculated. Also, geographic coordinates of orchards (latitude, altitude and elevation) were determined by using GPS. These data were used for producing weed maps using ArcGIS 10 software. 

Results: The results showed that there are 28 summer weed species in Citrus orchards of Bandar-e-Gaz township and these belong to 14 families. 25 percent of these species belong to Astearceae and other belongs to 12 families, respectively. In general, 68 and 32 percent of species were annual and perennial weeds, respectively. Also, 71 percent of weeds belong to dicotyledonous and 29 percent to monocotyledonous. The important spices of Poaceae family were included Setaria glauca, Echinochloa crus-galli, and Setaria verticillata; also, the important spices of Asteraceae family were Eclipta sp., Artemisia annua, and Conyza bonariensis. Based on dominate index, the most important weeds in citrus orchards of Bandar-e-Gaz were included: Cynodon-dactylon (42.2%), Amaranthus spp., (36%), Cyperus-rotundus (32.6%) and Portulaca-oleracea (32.5%). 

Conclusion: The weed distribution maps showed that Amaranthus retroflexus, Cynodon dactylon, Cyperus rotundus, Portulaca oleracea, and Solanum nigrum were presented in the most orchards. Also, in the some of studied citrus orchards, high diversity and dominance were observed that due to similar management practices of farmers in the studied area.

