Background and Objectives: Excessive use of fossil fuels, global population growth and increasing industrial expansion after industrial revolution have caused gradual evident changes in earth’s climate. The climate change resulted in change in hydrology regimes and increase of heavy rainfalls in a way that a rise of extreme events is predicted for upcoming decades. The climate change in recent years has become an important issue due to the extreme events impacts on economy, society and financial losses which have turned it to a matter of considerable concern for climate scientists and the entire international community. The objective of this research is to investigate the effect of climate change on precipitation amount in Golestan province’s specific stations during three upcoming periods. 
Materials and Methods: In this research was carried out to investigate the effect of climate change on precipitation amount in Golestan province’s specific stations during three upcoming periods of 2011-2040, 2041-2070 and 2071-2100 under two emission scenarios A1 and B2 and to analyze the impact of such changes on precipitation extreme events in these areas. It is noteworthy to mention that in this research the precipitation data from Climate Research Unit (CRU) database besides proportional spatial and temporal downscaling method for variation agent were used.
Results: The results predicted the highest increase in average annual precipitation in Bandar Torkaman station by 17.6% and the highest decrease in Pishkamar station by 13.1% under A1 scenario during far period. Moreover the number of precipitation extreme events has risen as we get closer to the end of 21th century in which the more extreme precipitation under A1 and B2 scenarios is predicted to happen in wet and semi-dry stations respectively. Comparison between extreme precipitation contributions from precipitation in total wet days with observed precipitation showed that in wet stations, this extreme value did not have significant change compared to observed precipitation. But in semi-arid stations, in far periods we expect that precipitation should be more than two or three times of observed precipitation.  
Conclusion: According to the A1 scenario, heavy rainfall will be increased at wet stations and also under B2 scenario at semi-arid stations that reveal more severe conditions in the far future. These forecasts indicate the great impact of climate change on flooding rainfall in future. According to the findings of this research as the end of the 21st century approaching, the likelihood of flooding heavy rainfall in the province affected by climate change increased. With respect to fifth place of Golestan province flooding potential in Iran, it is required to have more attention on this issue same as before.  

