Background and Objective: Flood is an important hydrological event which has considerable outcomes in human’s life. The frequency analysis of prior period is one of the ways for assessing this event. However, the selection method of extreme values can have a significant impact on frequency analysis of such events. Several approaches have been proposed for this purpose, including the annual maximum series (AMS) and the peaks over threshold (POT). In the AMS method, only the greatest event occurred in each year is selected. But in POT method, regardless of the time of occurrence of extreme events, a threshold is determined and the values over threshold are participated in the frequency analysis. The question is how to determine the appropriate threshold. For this aim, some constraints have been made, satisfying them, optimal point can be determined. Studies in this context could be noted is Francisco study (1987). He proposed POT model to assess the risk of flood processes and suggested this model is better than the AMS model. Bordi and et al. (2006), used both AMS & POT methods for extreme value analysis of monthly precipitation and standard statistical methods to determine the threshold values. 
Materials and Methods: Golestan province is one of the major regions of agriculture in Iran. Thus, Arazkuseh station in this province, with longtime daily recorded discharge data during 1344-45 to 1388-89, was selected as the study area. Drawing time-series diagrams for discharge data, individual events were selected to be used in the POT method. There are some tools to find the appropriate threshold. Determining the threshold value is a multi-pronged approach. The appropriate choice for the threshold means to make balance between variance and bias. The next step involves the threshold and the peaks over threshold selection, the Generalized Pareto Distribution (GPD) was fitted to data series. After parameter estimation using maximum likelihood, designed flood with a specific return period was estimated.
Result: By selecting Annual maximum floods in Arazkuseh station and fitting them the extreme value distribution and estimating parameters using maximum likelihood approach, AMF return level plot was obtained. Delta method is used to calculate confidence intervals. On the other hand, according to selecting the observed peak flows over the threshold of 47 cubic meters per second and maximum likelihood estimation of GPD parameters, peak flows over selected threshold return period plot was obtained. Comparing the results of the extreme values frequency analysis indicated that the POT method provides higher quantiles than the AMS, in different return periods. Also, by plotting confidence intervals for different return periods, POT method presents less uncertainty. The optimal threshold of 47 cubic meters per second was obtained for flood frequency analysis.
Conclusion: Results indicate that both extreme values methods, involve close return levels, while in higher return periods, peaks over selected threshold (47 m3/s) method, leads to less return levels and also less uncertainty. This means that the confidence intervals of return periods estimated with peak over threshold method, is smaller and thus has a higher confidence coefficient, which justifies the use of this method.   

