Introduction & Objective: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common endocrinopa-thy affecting women. Chronic anovulation due to polycystic ovary syndrome predisposes women to endometrial changes.  Stachys lavandulifolia is an aromatic plant belonging to the Labiatae family proven to have estrogenic properties. In this study, we evaluated the effects of Stachys lavandulifolia extract on endometrial histological parameters in a rat model of PCOS.
Materials & Methods: Thirty-six adult female Sprague-Dawley rats, weighing between 17-200 g were used in this experimental study. PCOS was induced by a single intramuscular injection of 4 mg Estradiol Valerate. The rats were divided into six groups; control group with no treat-ment, the PCOS group receiving solvent, three PCOS groups treated by multiple doses (225, 450, 900 mg/kg) of Stachys lvandulifolia extract, and PCOS group receiving clomiphene cit-rate (1.5 mg/kg). Extracts were injected intraperitoneally for a period of 4 estrous cycles (16 days). The endometrial biopsies were stained with Hematoxylin-Eosin and then the number of glands, endometrial glandular cell height, internal diameter of glands, height of epithelial cells and height of endometrium and pathological changes were examined.
Results: The results showed that the height of surface epithelium and glandular epithelium in-creased and the endometrial thickness and internal diameter of glands insignificantly de-creased in PCOS group compared to control (P > 0.05) while the number of glands showed significant decrease (P=0.01). In addition, 40% of the rats in PCOS group showed endo-metrial hyperplasia. Treatment with clomiphen citrate and different concentrations of the Stachys lvandulifolia led height of glandular epithelium, internal diameter of glands, height of surface epithelium and endometrium and number of glands to become more similar to the control group, although they were not significant(P > 0.05). Treatment with clomiphen citrate and 900 mg/kg concentrations of the Stachys lvandulifolia reduced hyperplasia in 35% and 33.3%  of rats respectively.
Conclusion: The results of this study showed that stachys lvandulifolia dose dependently causes changes in the endometrial histological parameters of PCOS rat model.
 (Sci J Hamadan Univ Med Sci 2016; 23 (1):40-48)
