Thyroid hormone has the a major role in the cardiovascular system function and cardiac a As well as to maintain the cardiovascular homeostasis A slightly change ind thyroid status actually affects cardiovascular mortality hemodynamic. The background of this study was to define the prevalence of thyroid dysfunction in acute coronary syndrome (ACS). The primary objective was to define the prevalence of thyroid dysfunction in acute coronary syndrome, including Non-ST Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction (NSTEMI), ST-segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI), and unstable angina groups. The secondary objective was to determine any associations of thyroids function tests with cardiac catheterization and mortality. In a prospective, observational, and cross section study, we enrolled 400 patients admitted at the coronary care unit of King Abdulaziz University Hospital in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. Venous blood samples were collected from patients for the evaluation of thyroid function (thyroids stimulating hormones, free triiodothyronine, and free thyroxin). Excluding those taking thyroid hormone preparations, 76.7% of patients admitted with acute coronary heart disease (ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction and Non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction), and unstable angina had euthyroidism. Thyroid dysfunction was reported in 23.3% of patients with coronary heart disease. Overall hypothyroidism prevalence was 7.8%, while subclinical hyperthyroidism in our study was 2.7%. Overt hyperthyroidism and subclinical hyperthyroidism was reported 2.0% and 0.5%, respectively. Euthyroid sick syndrome was noticed in 41 (10.2%) of critically ill patients. The mortality rate was 9.8%; all death patients had low triiodothyronine (T3) syndrome and were associated with statistically significant low free triiodothyronine (FT3) (P &gt; 0.001). No significant variance was observed among patients underwent for cardiac catheterization, STEMI, NSTEMI, unstable angina, and atrial fibrillation with respect to FT4, FT3, and TSH levels during coronary care unit hospitalization based on their profile data
