The occurrence of earthquake has made human being consider fundamental plans to reduce the consequent danger and destruction. The only means to reduce the vulnerability is to set specific management of urban crisis in construction; moreover, this aim cannot be achieved unless the city immunity, in confrontation of the earthquake, is considered as a major purpose in all stages of urban planning. Proper allocation of various urban land uses helps hugely the process of management of urban crisis related to the earthquake; accordingly, recognizing the different effective variables of vulnerability of urban areas from the aspects of urban land use, definition and declaring their relations with vulnerability, their analysis and finally preparing the land use optimizing maps with less percentage of vulnerability, is the principle target of this paper.

&nbsp;In this paper, for optimizing urban land use allocation, with the approach of reducing the vulnerability caused by the earthquake based on the physical factors, the multi-objective optimization algorithm NSGA-II was used for modeling. The 12th district of Tehran was taken as the subject of study. In this algorithm the main objectives include: maximizing compatibility of adjacent land uses, accessibility of land uses, availability of sanitary-medical and residential land uses to the Road network and minimizing susceptibility in earthquake's time and Minimizing land uses change. Considering the fact that the NSGA-II algorithm is multi-objective, the decision maker encounters different solutions in the Pareto-optimal front, which makes the process more complicated. Accordingly, to aid the decision making process and presenting the correspondent scenarios with the decision makers' priority, the clustering analysis was used with K-means approach. To study the changes of the results of different implementations of algorithm and stability of optimization algorithm, convergence trend and repeatability test carried out.

In the resulted optimized land use arrangements, the levels of objective functions are much better than the previous arrangement. Moreover, accessibility objective function has been improved mostly under the effect of optimization (27 %). The average percentage of the improvement of the objective functions in the algorithm was 19 %. In the repeatability test, the average percentage of the overlay of the algorithm's solutions in different runs was recorded as 76 %, which can be recognized as a proper value, and represents the suitable repeatability of the algorithm. The results were found acceptable based on the convergence trend, by having the stable value of the objective functions after specific times of iteration.

Several factors represent the efficiency of the model which can be named as; the proper method of optimization that was compatible with the problem, defining the objective functions based on the reality and including the main aspects of the problem&nbsp; of the earthquake vulnerability&nbsp; in the presented model, concerning the opinion of the decision makers in the process of the research and the final stage for selecting the optimum arrangement with the analysis of the results of the scenarios and the scenarios' clustering. The results of this research can be an aid as a means to support deciding for the planner and urban management policy makers encountering earthquake, in planning appropriately for the urban spaces.

