Background and Objectives: Appropriate attitude about Enjoining good and forbidding evil (EGFE) as two fundamental topics in Islam that are known as a social phenomenon can use as a powerful tool in Islamic organizations to promote happiness, management improvement and correction of defficiencies. The objective was to assess attitude of hospital staff regarding enjoining good and forbidding evil. Methods: This cross-sectional analytic descriptive study was done in a hospital of Isfahan province in 2012. The data were collected from the employed staff of the hospital in all the organizational ranks. No sampling was done in this census study and the data were elicited from all the members of the research population. The data collection tool was a 25-item questionnaire whose validity and reliability were confirmed. The data were analyzed using SPSS 16 software. results: In the current study, 50.9% of the participants were men and 49.1% were women. The percentage scores of the staff attitude of task awareness were 67%, beliefs about the EGFE 39%, religious actions 66%, acceptance 63%, the effects of the EGFE 59%, behavior of others who gives orders 56%, and self-justification was 65%. The overall employee attitude about EGFE was 65%. Significant difference was seen between the hospital departments (P=0.010). There was no significant difference between the scores of the EFGE and the other demographic variables (P> 0.05). Conclusion: According to the findings of the study, the status of employee attitude about task awareness, religious actions, acceptance, effects, behavior of others who gives orders, self-justification, and attitude was relatively moderate. Employee attitude toward the EGFE beliefs was relatively weak. It is recommended that employees&amp;#039; attitude should be increased. Training to improve the employee attitude toward the EGFE should be focused on women, persons who have diploma or under diploma education, and also the coronary care unit (CCU) staff.

