Certainly one of the main reasons of fast growth of technology development in industrialized developed countries is the attention to commercialization process of internal researches' results of those countries. It can be concluded that the basis of commercialization process is the cooperation of research and industrial divisions in conversion of researches' results into innovations and developing new products.
Nowadays shortages in resources, requisiteness of resources utilization, undertaken investments in researches and also because of competitiveness and globalization of markets make the connection and alignment of researches with economic goals and commercialization of researches' results very necessary. In this survey, it has been tried to study the impact of resources and environmental variables in commercialization of new product development. Especially study the impact of variables like "dominant design", "increase in heterogeny of market" and "network's side effect" as the Research Hypotheses in Iranian National Center of Laser Science and Technology in current survey. This survey has an applied objective and is descriptive-survey in nature. The data collection for literature review carried out through library research, and in order to test the research hypotheses a researcher-made questionnaire was applied. For review the validity of questionnaire, the content and construct related validities were used, and also "Cronbach's alpha" was used to assess the reliability of questionnaire, which obtained the result of 0.84. The statistical population of the study encompassed all of the Iranian National Center of Laser Science and Technology's experts, whom were 200 persons. The sampling method was "simple sampling". Also "bivariate linear regression" and "structural equation modeling" were used as the inferential statistics methodology in this survey. Finally findings of current survey implied that "dominant design", "acquire technology attitude" and "increase in heterogeny of market" have significant effect on commercialization of new product in Iranian National Center of Laser Science and Technology. Whereas "the company's resources" and "network's side effect" do not have any significant effect on commercialization of new product in Iranian National Center of Laser Science and Technology.

