Whole spine scanography (WSS) is a radiologic examination that
                            requires whole body X-ray exposure. Consequently, the amount of patient
                            radiation exposure is higher than the radiation dose following routine
                            X-ray examination. Several studies have evaluated the patient effective
                            dose (ED) following single exposure film-screen WSS. The objective of
                            this study was to evaluate patient ED during WSS, based on the automatic
                            image pasting method for multiple exposure digital radiography (APMDR).
                            Further, the calculated EDs were compared with the results of previous
                            studies involving single exposure film-screen WSS. We evaluated the ED
                            of 50 consecutive patients (M:F = 28:22) who underwent WSS using APMDR.
                            The anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral (LAT) projection EDs were
                            evaluated based on the Monte Carlo simulation. Using APMDR, the mean
                            number of exposures was 6.1 for AP and 6.5 for LAT projections. LAT
                            projections required more exposures (6.55%) than AP projections. The
                            mean ED was 0.6276 mSv (AP) and 0.6716 mSv (LAT). The mean ED for LAT
                            projections was 0.6061 mSv in automatic exposure control (AEC) and
                            0.7694 mSv in manual mode. The relationship between dose-area-product
                            (DAP) and ED revealed a proportional correlation (AP, R2 = 0.943; LAT,
                            R2 = 0.773). Compared to prior research involving single exposure
                            screen-film WSS, the patient ED following WSS using APMDR was lower on
                            AP than on LAT projections. Despite multiple exposures, ED control is
                            more effective if WSS is performed using APMDR in the AEC
                            mode.
