Low back pain (LBP) is among the most prevalent musculoskeletal
                            conditions in the developed countries. It is a common problem causing
                            disability and imposing a huge economic burden to individuals and state
                            organizations. Imaging plays an important role in diagnosis of the
                            etiology of LBP. The electronic databases included: PubMed (1950 to
                            present), Ovid SP Medline (1950 to present) and ISI (1982 to present)
                            and Google Scholar. In every search engine another search was performed
                            using various permutations of the following keywords: ultrasonography,
                            ultrasound imaging, low back pain, back muscles, paraspinal muscles,
                            multifidus, transverse abdominis, muscle size, spinal canal, sacroiliac
                            joint and spondylolisthesis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is widely
                            used in evaluation of patients with LBP; however, high costs, limited
                            availability and contraindications for its use have restricted MRI
                            utilization. In a quest for a less expensive and readily available tool
                            to investigate LBP, clinicians and researchers found ultrasonography
                            (US) as an alternative. In this review we discuss the US application in
                            diagnosis of some common causes of non-specific chronic LBP. Discussed
                            topics include evaluation of spinal canal diameter, paraspinal and
                            transabdominal muscles, sacroiliac joint laxity, pregnancy related LBP,
                            sacroiliitis, and spondylolisthesis using US in patients with LBP. While
                            the first researches on employing ultrasound in diagnosis of patients
                            with LBP had been focused on spinal canal diameter, recent studies have
                            been mostly performed to evaluate the role of transabdominal and
                            paraspinal muscles on core stability and thereby LBP occurrence. On the
                            other side, Doppler ultrasonography has recently played an important
                            role in objective measurement of joint laxity as a common etiology for
                            LBP. Doppler imaging also in pregnant patients with LBP has been
                            recommended as a safe and sensitive method. As conclusion, according to
                            recent and most prestigious studies, focusing more on transabdominal
                            muscle thickness can be considered as future approach in
                            investigations.
