Summary Currently, the environmental protection has found an important role in most countries. The effluents of the Sungun Copper Mine Concentration Plant (SCMCP) have the destructive effects. The location of farms, especially around the mine, should be performed based on technical and economical topics. In the present study, in order to the consideration of the main aims of the Mine management, a multi-objective approach is used. The effluents of SCMCP have some destructive effects on the Arasbaran forests. Thus, determination of the proper locations to discharge the wastewaters of the SCMCP is one of the important issues which should be considered. The Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) method is an appropriate method for measuring the efficiency. The development of uncertainty in the world, indicates the importance of DEA method and its applications.   Introduction Recently, various methods have been used to purify industrial and urban effluents also acidic mine drainages considering the importance of the environmental issues. In general, plants use several basic processes to do purification in the nature. In order to choose the best location of farm plants that are irrigated with wastewaters of the SCMCP, the management main goals should be considered.   Methodology and Approaches In the present study, the efficient locations have been determined in order to discharge the industrial wastewaters of the SCMCP using multi-objective approach based on developed DEA method that is the Simultaneous Data Envelopment Analysis (SDEA) which uses the interval data. The integration of quartet goals with the weighted global criterion method is used to solve the proposed multi-objective model.   Results and Conclusions How to use the model, the analysis process of the results, the description and the validation of the model for the Sungun Copper Mine have been studied as the case study. Due to the obtained results from solving the model and considering the different weight combinations, it can be said that the proposed model tries to provide a balance among different functions.
