ABSTRACT
Background: Breast cancer is one of the chronic diseases which due to its symptoms and side effects, originating from local and systematic treatments such as surgery and chemotherapy, could affect the afflicted women’s quality of life.  The side -effects of this illness leads to reduction of the quality of care which they provide for themselves,   and consequently due to the important role that they have within the family unit, their disease affects the overall quality of their families’ life.  Moreover, these side-effects can affect the roles and function which each member of the family has within the family unit Thus to improve the quality of these patients’ lives, not only an awareness associated with their quality of life, but also the influential factors on the family unit must be considered.  Therefore, the present study has been conducted to determine the effects of family counseling on the quality of life of the breast cancer patients who are undergoing chemotherapy.
Material and Methods: :  This study is a quasi-experimental study.  The test subjects were selected from among the breast cancer patients who are undergoing chemotherapy in different clinics in Qazvin.  These test subjects were placed in two different groups of test and control.  The subjects in the test group attended eight counseling session which was conducted by a family counselor.  During these counseling sessions, the patients’ spouses and children were also present.  In both the test and control groups, the patients’ quality of life markers were measured both at the beginning and end of the counseling sessions, and the data was analyzed using the Spss 15 statistical software.
Results: The result of the studies showed that the family counseling lead to reduction of the side-effects of chemotherapy such as fatigue, vomiting and nausea, pain, painful breathing, sleep disorder, lack of appetite, constipation, diarrhea and financial problems.  Moreover, these counseling sessions showed to have a reducing effect on the symptoms and other breast cancer and chemotherapy related side-effects such as worrying about the hair-loss and breast and arms related symptoms (P < 0.05).  
Conclusion: considering the results of the present study which is clearly shows the effect and the role of the family members of the breast cancer patients on reduction of the symptoms and side-effects of the cancer and chemotherapy in them, it is recommended that a special attention is needed to be paid to the role of the family in the clinical and other related treatments when dealing with the ladies who have breast cancer and are undergoing chemotherapy.

