Background and Purpose: 
Dermatophytosis is one of the most common infections of skin, hair, and nails,
 caused by a 
group of keratinophilic fungi known as dermatophytes. Species identification of these fungi is of great significance from 
epidemiological and therapeutic points of view. The objective of the present study was to investigate dermatophytosis 
and
its  causative  agents  in  patients,  referring  to  the  Central  Mycology  Laboratory  of  Yazd  University  of  Medical  
Sciences, Yazd, Iran
. 
Materials and Methods:
 In total, 139 clinically suspected cases of dermatophytosis were examined during 12 months 
from  Febru
ary  2014  to  February  2015.  Skin  scrapings  were  assessed  through  direct  microscopic  examinations  and  
culture  studies.  Dermatophyte  isolates  were  identified  based  on  colony  morphology  on  potato  dextrose  agar  and  
dermatophyte  test  medium,  nutritional  requirem
ents,  urease  and  hair  perforation  tests,  and  microscopic  characteristics  
on slide cultures
.
Results: 
Dermatophytosis  was  mycologically  confirmed  in  26  (18.70%)  out  of  139  cases.  Although  there  was  a  
statistically  insignificant  difference  between  male  and  female  subjects,  men  were  dominantly  affected.  Infection  was  
significantly common  in  the  age  group of  ?  29  years  (P < 0.043). The  most  common  clinical  manifestation  of 
dermatophytosis was tinea corporis (69.2%), followed by tinea cruris (15.4%), tinea manuum
 (11.5%), and tinea pedis 
(3.8%). 
Trichophyton mentagrophytes
 complex was the main etiologic agent (38.5%), followed by 
T. rubrum
(23%), 
T. 
violaceum 
(15.5%), 
T. verrucosum
 (11.5%), 
Microsporum canis
 (7.7%), and 
Epidermophyton floccosum 
(3.8%).
Conclusion:
In  comparison  with  previous  research,  epidemiology  of  dermatophytosis  has  changed  in  Yazd  over  the  
past  decades.  Therefore,  periodical  investigations  on  the  epidemiological  aspects  of  this  infection  are  required  for  
efficient control and prevention of thi
s cutaneous dermatophytic disease
. 
