Soil moisture is one of the most important environmental factors in climate and hydrological models. So that understanding the spatial and temporal variations of it, has a great knowledge at different stages of the hydrological study. The main objective of the study was to taken functions to practical and easy to estimate soil surface moisture. 
For this purpose, digital data of OLI and TIRS sensors of Landsat8 in four seasons of winter, spring, summer and fall were used, February 5, 2015 in accordance with the Persian date Bahman 16 1393, April 26, 2015 in accordance with 6 Tir 1394, 31 July 2015 in accordance with the August 9 1394 and 19 October 2015 in accordance with the 27 October 1394, respectively. The research area is an arid and semiarid region in the province of Khorasan Razavi. The number of field soil moisture data in this study, was 47 points of 2.5kg in the study area (a total of 188 points on 4-repeating). 
Data stratified random sampling method, by creating networks of 1800 meters in systematic algorithms, to predict as to coincide with the satellite over the area. Soil samples were in the laboratory to determine the moisture content to weight-thermal method in accordance with the standard ASTM-D2216-90. Predictors of the study were 24 variables, including spectral reflectance, numerical indexes, Principal Components and Tasseled Cap Transformation.
Geographical correlation data were analyzed, by using Moran’s index with High/Low clustering method. After (pre)processing the spectral data, the correlation between all wavelengths, numerical indexes, Principal Components, Tasseled Cap Transformation and the actual amounts of surface soil moisture, at the same time over satellite and level of greater than or equal to 5% (level 1), 5-4 % (level 2) and smaller or equal to 4% (level 3) were determined.
Then, the estimation functions in the form of partial least square regression (PLSR), Backward Elimination,  Enter regression, Forward regression, Remove regression, M5 model trees (Cross-Validation) and stepwise regression were derived. 25% of the soil samples randomly selected, was used in the validation process. 
The taken stepwise in winter data and backward elimination in fall data provided more accuracy than other, for estimating surface soil moisture at all different levels of moisture and were more reasonable than that of Mean Bias Error. Analysis of data collected from the second and third repeat, did not lead to a significant relationship. Finally the results of the latest survey statistical error in the validation stage, lead to the three models to the desired moisture level. Utility models are introduced because of RMSE fit (0.585-1.425), the amount of suitable Mean Bias Error, Coefficient of Determination, Standard Deviation and Ratio Performance Deviation.

