Abstract
Introduction: The professional socialization is the process of which the individual gain values , norms, behaviors and social skills relevant to a profession and internalize a sense of identity to a specialized field. Therefore, the process begins at the first step of the nursing education program and continues with completion of nursing education till entering into the work place. Thus, the formation of nursing as a occupation takes place through professional socialization of individuals.
Objective: This study is done with the aim of assessment of professional socialization level among nursing students at Guilan University of Medical Sciences.
Methods: A cross sectional descriptive analytical approach was adopted. Participants were all nursing students at the faculty of Shahid Beheshti in Rasht. In total 211 students were chosen.  Sampling was conducted with census. The instrument used was a Researcher made questionnaire that from the statements contained in the instruments by Shahim, and some of the items offered by Chao et al were given to samples. The data was analyzed with descriptive and inferential statistics (Independent T test, correlation Pearson coefficient, one way ANOVA, post Hoc Tukey). 
Results: The finding of the study showed weak level (0%) and 40 students (19%) were in moderate level and most of the samples (81%) were in good level of professional socialization. In general, professional socialization had a statistically significant relationship with  factors such as marital status (p=0.045), age (p=0.029,r=0.151), family residence (p=0.04), maternal education (p=0.023), student work (p=0.031), theoretical instructor (p=0.0001), clinical lecturer (p=0.032), having information about the nursing profession before entering the field (p=0.0001),compliance between previous image and existing realities (p=0.0001 ), interest in the course (p=0.0001). 
Conclusion: From the research findings, the level of professional socialization of nursing students is acceptable. Recognition of the professional status can drew authorities’ attention to provide opportunities for greater autonomy in practice and systematic holistic nursing care situations

