The assessment of structural seismic response is often done by selecting ground
motion records that conform to the seismic hazard conditions of the objective
site, and which can be obtained based on probabilistic seismic hazard analysis
(PSHA). A common recordselection practice suggests selecting seven records that
are compatible with the dominant earthquake scenario in a given site. The
selected records are then scaled (if necessary) to match the design level of
the uniform hazard spectrum (UHS). Many research results have shown that using
the UHS leads to a significant bias in structural response assessment. The
conditional mean spectrum (CMS) has been recently proposed as an alternative to
the uniform hazard spectrum (UHS) for employment as a target spectrum in
ground motion record selection. The CMS provides the expected response spectrum,
conditional to the occurrence of a target spectral acceleration value in the period of interest. The correlation of ?  values in different periods is considered in CMS development, but conventional
regression analysis has been applied to measure the degree of correlation of ?  values in different periods, and the influence of outlier data has not been studied. Outliers are sample values that
cause surprises in relation to the majority of samples. The main objective of this paper is to 
reveal an important drawback in the procedure for calculation of CMS. The authors believe that
 the developed procedure for CMS leads to a spectral shaped anomaly that is not consistent
enough with real ground motion. A robust regression analysis is proposed in
this paper to improve the current CMS, which is based on a conventional
regression analysis. Robust regression is an important tool for analyzing data
that are contaminated with outliers. Robust regression analysis works by
assigning a weight to each data point. Weighting is done ``automatically and iteratively using a 
process called'' iteratively reweighted least squares.
The results show that the proposed robust CMS significantly differs from the
conventional CMS, especially for higher periods of interest. The shape of the 
robust CMS represents rare ground motion in a more reliable manner, compared 
with convent Convertional CMS.


