Objective: In this study, we investigate the effect of naproxen on non-cyclic mastalgia versus placebo.  
Introduction: Mastalgia is the most frequent breast complaint in general practice. Non-cyclical mastalgia is described as a constant or intermittent breast pain with irregular exacerbations and no relationship to menstruation. It can be sufficiently severe to interfere with normal-life activities.
At present, there isn’t any standard treatment for this complaint, although some of the drugs have been adequately tested in decrease of mastalgia.
Materials & Methods: This prospective placebo-controlled, randomized triple-blind clinical trial was conducted to evaluate the effect of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (Naproxen) on non-cyclic breast pain.
Eighty women with non-cyclical mastalgia who had attended the mastalgia clinic at the Iranian Center for Breast Cancer (ICBC) in Jan 2005 were studied.
All of the patients who had been suffering from non-cyclic breast pain at least 3 months previously were visited by one surgeon then patients were assigned randomly into 2 groups: (1) Naproxen 250mg and (2) placebo twice daily for 1 month.
The intensity of mastalgia was recorded three times during the course of the study (0, 15, 30 days) using a visual analogue scale (VAS).
Results: A total of 80 patients entered the trial; 41 and 39 patients were randomly assigned in naproxen and placebo groups respectively.
The mean age of patients was 34 years (SD=8) ranging from 19 to 55 years. The naproxen and placebo groups were similar with respect to age. 
The mean duration of pain in naproxen group was 17.4 months versus 25.8 months in placebo group.
The mean of pain severity was 5.8 and 6.1 in naproxen and placebo group respectively at the presentation (0 day) while it was reduced to 3.9 (P=0.005) and 3.7 (P=0.0001) at the end of the study respectively.
Although the decrease in pain severity in each individual group was statistically significant when two groups compared with each other (P=0.64).
Conclusion: We found that naproxen has no superiority to placebo in reducing non cyclic mastalgia.

