Background and Objective: Family as one of the most important social bodies,
more than any other social body requires to be protected from risks and
threats that jeopardize its integration through face to face relationships. In order
to maintain these face to face relationships and to keep them sustainable,
families require a subjective and concrete backing to repel the relevant risks
and threats, i.e. enjoying societal security. On the other hand, social capital
which provides the ground for cooperation and collaboration, trust and active
contribution to social life; and is formed in a circumstances wherein social
interaction exists may not only prevent the family from disintegration and
collapse, but also bring about comfort and ,security and support networks.
Hence, the present article struggles to express the relationship between social
capital security feeling on the part of families and offer ways for promoting
security feeling on the part of families.
Method: the present research is of survey type and is conducted through using
questionnaire. N=399 including the households resident in three regions in Khoramabad
city, and they are selected through random organized assorted method.
Findings: The research indicates a meaningful correlation between social
capital constituents and family security feeling: physical, financial, collective
and mental security dimensions. Therefore, the higher the level of social trust,
institution trust, social awareness, social cooperation and social relationship,
the more secure they would feel. From among the whole variables reviewed;
social trust, institution trust and social awareness account for 44 percent of the
dependent variable.
average of Tehrani citizens' trust in police is 0.507. The experimental data related
to the relationship between contextual variables (age, education and job
security) and dependent variable (trust in police entity and police agents) indicate
that there is meaningful relationship between these variables in the certainty
level of 0.99; and direction of this relationship in some variables-age and
job security_ is positive, and the direction of the education variable is negative.
According to the results achieved from fuzzy analysis of data, the number of
cases which are members of the series: efficiency, accountability, Police's cohesion
orientation (except organizational transparency) exceeds the number
of those cases which are not members of the series. According to regression
analysis, there is a meaningful, positive and strong relationship between independent
variables (norm orientation, accountability, efficiency and organizational
transparency, the certainty level of which is 0.99. Regression correlation
of Trust in police with the linear composition of the causative conditions:
efficiency, accountability, organizational transparency and norm cohesion is
0.85. A proportion of the combination of variance for trust in police which are
expressed through relative contribution of the whole causative conditions is
0.72. The weight of efficiency, as a factor, is more than other existing factors in
expressing societal trust in police.
