Background: Psoriasis is a ‎disease which may have a direct ‎impact on the psychological and ‎social aspects of the patient, ‎particularly due to its visibility. To ‎date, we are unaware of any ‎study showing a relationship ‎between psoriasis and ‎psychological parameters such ‎as psychological vulnerability ‎and coping strategies‏. ‏
Objective:‎‏ ‏‎ The aim of this study ‎was to evaluate the effects of ‎psoriasis on some psychological ‎parameters in an Iranian ‎population‏. ‏
Methods‏:‏Patients having ‎histopathologically confirmed ‎psoriasis for at least 6 months ‎attending the Dermatology Clinic ‎of Razi Hospital were included if ‎they agreed to participate in the ‎study. Patients with history of ‎schizophrenia, major depression ‎or other psychological disorders ‎were excluded. All patients were ‎at least 18 years old. The patients ‎were then referred to the ‎researchers for filling out the ‎appropriate questionnaires under ‎the guidance of an involved ‎psychologist. To evaluate skin ‎involvement, Psoriasis Area ‎Severity Index (PASI) score was ‎calculated and used for all ‎patients. All data were stored in ‎files for further analysis‏. ‏
Results‏: ‏There were 101 ‎females and 99 males with the ‎mean age of 43.2(±16.32). The ‎mean PASI Score was 6.58 ± ‎‎6.04. Diffuse skin involvement ‎was the commonest form of ‎disease (133 patients, 66.5%). ‎The highest score for Illness ‎perception belonged to those ‎with genitalia involvement (185.2, ‎worst illness perception), and the ‎lowest score for Illness ‎perception belonged to those ‎with nail involvement (168.2). ‎Consistently, the lowest score of ‎facing the problems (CISS: ‎approach strategy to disease) ‎belonged to those with hand ‎involvement (50.5) whereas the ‎highest score belonged to those ‎with genitalia involvement (60.4). ‎There was a significant ‎correlation between ‎psychological vulnerability vs. ‎Illness perception score as well ‎as psychological vulnerability vs. ‎coping strategies score. ‎Surprisingly, PASI score had an ‎insignificant relationship with ‎illness perception, coping ‎strategies or psychological ‎vulnerability score‏. ‏
Conclusion‏:‏‎ PASI score as a ‎representing factor of skin ‎involvement has a limited role in ‎predicting the effect of psoriasis ‎on mental status and illness ‎perception of psoriatic patients. ‎Psychological vulnerability of the ‎patients is the main predicting ‎factor of illness perception and ‎coping strategies (representing ‎patients approach to their ‎disease or their treatment ‎beliefs).‎

