&lt;strong &gt;Introduction &lt;/strong &gt;
A suitable planting date is an important management tool to determine the best match between phenological stages of plant growth with the environmental factors affecting them. Indigo is known for the natural blue colors obtained from the leaflets and branches of this herb. In addition to indigo dyes, it has been used medicinally to purify the liver, reduce inflammation and fever and to alleviate pain. Determining the proper sowing time for the sowing indigo plant is highly important that should be based on the climate of each region separately. The objective of this research was to determine the effect of sowing date on growth and biological yield of indigo plant in Shahrood region.
 &lt;strong &gt;Materials and Methods &lt;/strong &gt;
This experiment was carried out on randomized complete block design with three replications in the experimental field of the University of Shahrood, Iran, in 2011. Treatments were three planting dates (18 June, 3 and 18 July). Plant density was 50 plants per square meter. The distance between the plants on and between the rows was 10 and 20 cm, respectively. Sampling was conducted in six-stages (every 15 days) randomly in 0.25 m2. Equation 1 was used to calculate the growth rate.
CGR =   (Equation 1) Y =   (Equation 2)
In this equation, W1: dry weight in the first sampling, W2: dry weight in the second sampling, SA: sampling area (m-2), t1: first sampling time, t2: is the second sampling time. To do this, three parameters sigmoid function [Eq. 2], were fitted to dry matter accumulation variation during the season (Equation 2): In the equation 2: Y is the cumulative dry matter content at any time (x) of growing season, b: is the slope of increasing and xo is the time (in degree days) of reaching to 50% dry matter accumulation. Gaussian function parameter [Eq. 3] was fitted to the crop growth rate data variation:
Y =  (Equation 3) GDD  (Equation 4)
In equation 3: Y value is crop growth rate at any time (x) of growing season, b: is the slope of increasing and x0 is the time of reaching plant to the maximum CGR. In this study, instead of day, we used growing degree days (GDD) according to Equation 4: In this equation Tmax: maximum daily temperature, Tmin: minimum daily temperature, Tb: temperature of the plant, which was considered to indigo 10.27 °C (6). Fitting equations and drawing diagrams were performed using Sigma Plot 10 version. Analysis of variance and correlation between traits were performed using SAS software and means were compared using LSD test at the 5% level.
 &lt;strong &gt;Results and Discussion &lt;/strong &gt;
Results showed that (Figure 2a and Table 2) the earliest planting date (18 June) increased total dry matter and crop growth rate about 4.41 and 3.59 folds compared to third planting date (18 July), respectively. In addition, the highest GDD was recorded for the first sowing date (18 June). The results showed that the fastest (38.34) and the lowest (12.37) growing rate was related to 18 June and 18 July planting dates, respectively (Table 3). Gupta (10) also stated that there was a significant correlation between sowing time and plant biological yield, as with delay in sowing date plant dry weight has been decreased. Mean comparison results showed that the lowest plant height was obtained at the early planting date (18 June) and the lowest of it was seen in the late planting date (18 July) (Figure 5 B). In the first planting date (18 June), biological yield increased 47.27% compared to the later planting date (18 July). In third sowing date biological yield decreased significantly than first and second planting dates (Figure 5 A). Zhelgazkov et al. (21) on Coriandrum sativum L. showed that the earliest cultivation increased the length of effective growth period and finally caused an increase in fruit and biological yield. The reason for reduction of biological yield in delayed cultivation in addition to shortening of growth season is related to coincidence of vegetative and reproduction period with summer heat which resulted in severe reduction in the stem height, leaf dry matter and finally decreasing biological yield. This result is in agreement with findings of Kacurik (14); he stated that the height, fresh and dry flowers of the chamomile was reduced with delay in planting date. 
 &lt;strong &gt;Conclusions &lt;/strong &gt;
In this study, the highest plant height, leaf dry weight and biological yield, was observed in 18 June sowing date. According to our results may be both day long and especially temperatures during reproductive growth, flowering and maturity are the limiting factors in above ground biomass formation. Based on our results, sowing dates of 18 June was the best planting date for indigo plant in Shahrood region.
