We propose a fundamentally new approach to the treatment of shearband localizations in strain softening
elastic–plastic solids at  nite strains based on energy minimization principles associated with
microstructure developments. The point of departure is a general internal variable formulation that determines
the  nite inelastic response as a standard dissipative medium. Consistent with this type of
inelasticity we consider an incremental variational formulation of the local constitutive response where
a quasi-hyperelastic stress potential is obtained from a local constitutive minimization problem with
respect to the internal variables. The existence of this variational formulation allows the de nition of
the material stability of an inelastic solid based on weak convexity conditions of the incremental
stress potential in analogy to treatments of  nite elasticity. Furthermore, localization phenomena are
interpreted as microstructure developments on multiple scales associated with non-convex incremental
stress potentials in analogy to elastic phase decomposition problems. These microstructures can be
resolved by the relaxation of non-convex energy functionals based on a convexi cation of the stress
potential. The relaxed problem provides a well-posed formulation for a mesh-objective analysis of localizations
as close as possible to the non-convex original problem. Based on an approximated rank-one
convexi cation of the incremental stress potential we develop a computational two-scale procedure for
a mesh-objective treatment of localization problems at  nite strains. It constitutes a local minimization
problem for a relaxed incremental stress potential with just one scalar variable representing the intensity
of the microshearing of a rank-one laminate aligned to the shear band. This problem is su ciently
robust with regard to applications to large-scale inhomogeneous deformation processes of elastic–plastic
solids. The performance of the proposed energy relaxation method is demonstrated for a representative
set of numerical simulations of straight and curved shear bands which report on the mesh independence
of the results
