The goal of this study was to assess of non-continuously Bachelor Curriculum of physical education teaching. The Statistical popularly in this study was the physical education students of Teacher training courses bachelor who studied in teacher training institutions, the professors who teach these different courses and physical education teacher graduated of this institutions. In this study, stratified sampling was used and the subjects in the strata were selected randomly. The sample was 69 graduated of this institutions, 187 physical education students and 90 professors. This is descriptive-survey study. The researcher made questionnaire was used was used to collect data. According to result of PCA, Curriculum is studied on the basis of four elements which are: objective and content, teaching strategies, Educational Facilities and Equipment, evaluation. To analyze the information taken from the questionnaires, some statistical methods were used such as: frequency, percentage, means, standard deviation in descriptive statistics To do the above testes, SPSS Software 18 version was used. The finding showed that 50 percent of whole groups, described contents of the curriculum of education courses with goal and assessed effectiveness and successfulness this curriculum in goals reach at low levels. 65 present of whole groups stated that the present educational equipment and facilities don’t adapt with educational needs. Also, the results showed, theoretical courses content adapted with teaching method of speaking (72 present), cooperation (71 present), seminar (66 present) and practical courses content adapted with teaching method of cooperation (72 present). By the way, the theoretical courses content adapted with assessing method of writing and finally and continually quadruple (80 present), brief-answer (78 present), descriptive (77 present) and practical courses content with assessing method of practical (77 present). That is recommended, establishing committee for re-writing of this curriculum content, assessing needs and organizing of educational equipment and facilities.
