Quality of urban life is one of the most important fields of urban studies in different countries that under the affection of factors such as time, place, personal and social values have a complex and multidimensional concept and often are measured by using subjective and objective indices and rarely by the both ones. Cities at different scales have  benefited of this index completely different, especially the cities with the huge number of emigrations , in spite of having high population and connecting to higher level of urban system, have a great distance from the cities at the same class in the indices of the life quality.This research evaluates the quality of life in the middle-sized cities of Borujerd and Kouhdasht in Lorestan that have different levels of life.  This research is made by descriptive method of causation – comparative method. The required data was collected  by library-documentary and field  surveying  method in these cities.  The statistical population consisted of citizens over 15 years of age and samples are 643. This is a descriptive research with the comparative method. The results of this research indicated that the satisfaction of citizens in the city of Boroujerd is in the better   levels because of the main reasons such as population levels, literacy level, household income, performance of municipal authorities and its infrastructure consist of transportation, educational facilities, care and treatment. From the other findings of this research can be noted to that population levels is effective in citizens, satisfaction levels from quality of life so that the more population and larger city (borujerd) have the more satisfacation from quality of life rather than the smaller city (kuhdasht). Unlike the objective indices , from subjective view in Kouhdasht, the greatest amount of satisfaction is relevant with supplying the main and daily requirements ( food , clothing and …) and citizens' feeling comfortable of living in the city which refers to the contentment feature of the people of this area.  Generally, the high distance of life quality index of Kuhdasht city with the city at the higher level of medium of the province, indicates this fact that precipitance of Kuhdasht in accepting population and its connection to the middle cities of the province do not mean the development of life indices in this city.As it is clear, studying the condition of indices of the life quality, lack of urban facilities and governing the  rural culture besides the problems of emigration  has kept this index at a very low level.


