Objective Executive functions are referred to higher and self-tuning cognitive processes that help managing&nbsp;behaviors and thought controls. Executive functions in children are assessed in different ways. The most prestigious&nbsp;and valuable way is using daily functions reports on a child's natural environment. This study aimed to&nbsp;prepare the Persian version of behavior rating inventory of executive function-preschool (BRIFF-P) and study&nbsp;of its face and content validity among Iranian children. The questionnaire completed by parents of 2-5 years&nbsp;old children.
Materials & Methods This study has methodological and psychometric design. We studied the Persian version&nbsp;of tests using standard protocols IQOLA and determined its validity. This protocol includes translation, evaluation&nbsp;of translation quality, backward translation, and comparing the English version with its Persian one. Face&nbsp;validity was determined by 20 samples (parent) and the impact score was measured. Content validity index&nbsp;(CVI) and ratio of the content validity (CVR) was determined by asking the opinions of 15 experts. Moreover,&nbsp;the simplicity, relevance, and transparency of each item was evaluated.
Results Based on the simplicity and clarity of questionnaire items, over 80% agreement of the sample&nbsp;group indicated the simplicity and clarity of the items. also the difficult and complex items were discussed&nbsp;among experts in several sessions and as a result the simpler and clearer concepts took the place of difficult&nbsp;and ambiguous items. Then, the score of proportion index effect and relation of items for each of&nbsp;63 items of questionnaire was calculated. the results showed that all items of questionnaire were simple&nbsp;and clear, also all items except 7 achieved impact score of higher than 1.5. To evaluate the content validity&nbsp;of the questionnaire, we used ratio of content validity and index calculation. Content validity showed that&nbsp;almost all items of the questionnaire achieved CVI score of higher than 0.79 (The lowest score was 0.8 and&nbsp;highest one was 1); however, as regards the index of relatedness, 3 items got scores lower than 0.79 The&nbsp;scores of the content validity ratio were more than 0.49, except the fifth item.
Conclusion The Persian version of this questionnaire possesses a good match in terms of cultural and face&nbsp;validity. The results of content validity confirms that the Persian version is clear, simple, and understandable&nbsp;for the target society. However, 7 items of the questionnaire got scores lower than 1.5. of course, as in this&nbsp;study, the parents of normal children were investigated, the importance of these items in evaluation of abnormal&nbsp;children must be considered, because in many abnormal growth development of children (like attention&nbsp;deficit/hyperactivity, autism) such behaviors are clearly considered problematic. Therefore, the importance of&nbsp;these items are seen in final questionnaire and in spite of low score of 1.5 of some items, in the sample group&nbsp;(normal children), these items were kept and inserted in the final questionnaire. The results of content validity&nbsp;were also indicative of different cultural assumptions from some items of this questionnaire. We suggest that&nbsp;in future studies, the content validity of the Persian version was estimted with regard to opinions of parents of&nbsp;abnormal children with growth development problems and then the results were compared. We also suggest&nbsp;examining the other kinds of reliability and validity of this test.

