Objective Bender-Gestalt is one of the well-known neurocognitive tests designed by Lorta Bender to evaluate&nbsp;perceptual-motor development level in children. Besides its principle application in evaluation of cerebral&nbsp;damage, Bender test has other important applications, such as evaluating children for entering school, anticipating&nbsp;educational progress, diagnosing children with reading and learning disorders, studying growth retardation,&nbsp;as well as a nonverbal intelligence test to evaluate children&rsquo;s reading readiness to enroll in elementary&nbsp;school. Because of the importance of this test in many diagnostics aspects, it is necessary to prepare a normalized&nbsp;form of this test. In this study, we tried to provide this form in a more comprehensive and updated form&nbsp;compared to previous studies.
Materials & Methods This is a descriptive-analytic research. The study population comprised all preschool&nbsp;children in Tehran. In this research, we surveyed 523 (271 boys and 252 girls) preschool children in 3 groups&nbsp;of 4-5 years old (200 children, 95 boys and 105 girls), 5-6 years old (199 children, 112 boys and 87 girls), and&nbsp;6-7 years old (124 children, 64 boys and 60 girls) who were selected by cluster sampling method from some&nbsp;preschools centers in south, north, and center of Tehran during the spring of 2012. The inclusion criteria were&nbsp;having normal intelligence quotient and being in the range of preschool age. Obtained protocols were numbered&nbsp;on the basis of expanded Koppitz scoring system, and finally were analyzed using the Chi-squared test.
Results Data analysis for 4-5 years old group revealed the result of M(SD) as 14.75(1.82). The most frequent&nbsp;errors belonged to distortion in plans A, 7, and then 8. Also, the least frequent errors belonged to linear drawing&nbsp;of plans 3 and 6. With regard to misproportion error in plan A and repetition error in plan 2, girls made&nbsp;significantly less errors than boys, while with regard to spin errors of plan 7 and misproportion in plan 7, boys&nbsp;got the higher scores. In 5-6 years old group of children, M(SD) was 9.67(4.38). Also, the most frequent errors&nbsp;belonged to distortion in plans 8 and A. Furthermore, the least frequent errors belonged to linear drawing in&nbsp;plan 3, distortion in plan 7, and isproportion of components in plan 5. With regard to inappropriate composition&nbsp;and linear drawing of plan 5, boys made significant higher errors than girls. For children of 6-7 years old,&nbsp;M(SD) was 8.14(4.17). The most common errors in drawing belonged to first distortion errors in plans A and&nbsp;8, and then spins in plans 7 and 3, and lastly to misproportion in plan 7. The least frequent errors belonged to&nbsp;linear drawing of plans 5 and 3, spin in plans 8 and 1, and finally distortion in plan 1. Male gender was effective&nbsp;in committing errors of wrong composition of plans A and 3, spin in plan 1, figure distortion in plans 6 and 7,&nbsp;also female gender in errors of wrong composition of plan 2, spin in plans 2 and 8.
Conclusion Consistent with Koppit&rsquo;z maturational hypothesis and previous studies (Iranian and foreign), our&nbsp;results showed visual-motor improvement of perceptual performance with increasing age. In conclusion, koppitz&nbsp;scoring system is applicable to Iranian children protocols.

