Objective Joint attention refers to person&rsquo;s ability in focusing on the present information in his or her&nbsp;visual attention, along with existing information on other&rsquo;s visual attention. In this process, 2 people&nbsp;actively pay attention to a thing, situation, or event. Defects in joint attention is considered one of the&nbsp;first diagnosable signs in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). This skill has considerable effect&nbsp;on growth and development of social, cognitive, and verbal skills. In other words, joint attention may act&nbsp;as a key skill, i.e. achieving this area of growth, brings several by-products for children. Therefore, using&nbsp;therapeutic early interventions in order to improve the joint attention of children with ASD is necessary.&nbsp;The present study aimed to investigate the effectiveness of family-based early intervention on the improvement&nbsp;of joint attention of the children with ASD.
Materials & Methods The research population included 57 children who had referred to Ordibehesht Autism&nbsp;Center in Isfahan. Because the present research sought for special cases, the purposeful sampling&nbsp;method was used. In this regard, the research sample comprised 3 children of 3-5 years old who had&nbsp;symptoms of autism spectrum disorder by the diagnosis of specialists, and had difficulties regarding joint&nbsp;attention. The research instrument was the Gilliam Autism Rating Scale (GARS) and Early Social Communication&nbsp;Scales (ESCS). In the present study, the single-subject study with the A-B design was used. In this&nbsp;method, after 5 baseline sessions, intervention was started and during 12 individual sessions, the joint&nbsp;attention skill is taught to children. To analyze the obtained data, at first the raw data were converted to&nbsp;standard T scores and the situation of baseline, intervention, and follow up of every subject was drawn&nbsp;on the diagram. To interpret and infer from the diagrams, we used visual analyses, trending, and stability,&nbsp;as well as percentages of non-overlapping data and overlapping data.&nbsp;

Results According to the visual analyses of the data diagrams, the intervention was effective on the 3&nbsp;subjects. The mean scores of 3 subjects in the baseline have increased from 39.92, 37.30, and 38.89 to&nbsp;52.04, 52.79, and 51.69, respectively. The percentage of non-overlapping data (PND) in the two baseline
and intervention situations for the 3 subjects was 83%, 100%, and 91%. This effectiveness was observable&nbsp;in the follow-up stage.
Conclusion The findings of the present study indicated that the family-based early intervention can be&nbsp;an effective educational program for improvement of joint attention of the preschool children with ASD.&nbsp;Because defects in joint attention is one of the main features of children with ASD and joint attention&nbsp;brings improvement in other aspects of growth, we suggest that improving joint attention be considered&nbsp;as a main objective in rehabilitation and educational interventions in children with autism.

