Supplier selection is one of the most critical activities of purchasing management in a supply chain, because of the key role of supplier performance in cost, quality, delivery and service towards achieving its objectives. Selecting the right supplier significantly reduces purchasing costs and improves corporate competitiveness, which is why many experts believe that supplier selection is the most important activity of a purchasing department. Supplier selection is a multiple-criteria decision-making (MCDM) problem that is affected by several conflicting factors. Consequently, a purchasing manager must analyze the trade-off between the several criteria. MCDM techniques support the decision makers (DMS) in evaluating a set of alternatives. In a real situation, for supplier selection problems, the weights of criteria are different and depend on purchasing strategies in a supply chain. It is a common practice for suppliers to offer quantity discounts to encourage the buyer towards larger orders. In this case, the buyer must decide what order quantities to assign to each supplier. This is a complicated multiobjective decision-making problem affected by several conflicting factors. This paper develops a mixed integer nonlinear programming model to coordinate the system of a single buyer and multiple vendors under an incremental quantity discount policy for the vendors. In this paper, in addition to considering incremental discount strategies, the cost of shortages is also considered. In this model, three goals, including minimization of buyer costs, volume of defective produce and delayed received goods, are considered. Two Pareto-based multi-objective meta-heuristic algorithms, namely; the non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) and the non-dominated ranking genetic algorithm (NRGA), are proposed to solve the supplier selection proposed model. Since the solution quality of all meta-heuristic algorithms severely depends on their parameters, the Taghuchi method has been utilized to tune the parameters of the algorithms. Finally, computational results obtained by implementing the algorithms on several problems of different sizes demonstrate the performance of the proposed methodologies.
