Abstract 
Introduction: HPV types 16 and 18 cause 70% of cervical cancer around the world. Approximately, in 70-50% of women HPV 16 and 18 antibodies are produced after-acquired infection. These antibodies remain for at least 4-5 years. 
Objective: This study aimed to determine antibody levels in the serum of patients with cervical cancer, CIN I,II,III in pap smears and its association with cervical abnormalities in sexually active women with no history of cervical abnormalities, respectively.
Materials and Methods: In this case-control study, 70 patients referred to the clinic of gynecological oncology in Al-Zahra hospital from 2007 to 2014 were enrolled. They were divided into 3 groups. The first group of patients have biopsy of cervical cancer, the second group who have Pap smear with CIN I, II, III results and in fact with premalignant lesions. The third group had normal Pap smear for malignant or premalignant lesions. From all of the groups, 5 cc blood samples were taken. Using ELISA kit for HPV-16 and HPV-18, the level of antibodies against HPV high-risk was measured. Demographic data including age, marital status, smoking, family history of cancer, age at menarche, menopausal status, parity, contraceptive method, Parity, history of sexually transmitted infections and history of contraceptive pills consumption for more than a year were recorded.
Results: Patients with cervical cancer and pre-malignant disease had a mean age of 30/8 ± 6/45 years. The mean age of healthy patients was 45.6±8.30 y/o. The difference between the three groups’ HPV18 antibody levels in healthy individuals, patients with biopsy results CIN I, II, III and cervical cancer patients was statistically significant (P=0.047). HPV18 antibody levels between the two groups of patients with cervical cancer, and biopsy results in patients with CIN I, II, III, was not statistically significant. But the difference between healthy subjects and patients with cervical cancer was statistically significant (034/0 = P). The mean level of HPV16 antibodies in patients with biopsy results CIN I, II, III and cervical cancer patients was statistically significant (P=0.046). The difference between two groups of healthy individuals and patients with biopsy results CIN I, II, III was on the borderline (p=0.043). Also, there was no statistically significant difference between the mean level of HPV 16 antibodies in patients with cervical cancer and patients with biopsy results CIN I, II, III (P=0.476)
Conclusion: The study showed that antibodies against HPV 16 and less HPV18 produced following the acquisition of infection, reduces the risk of cervical cancer and abnormalities.

