In order to take advantage of economies of scale, most major airlines use hub-and-spoke networks in their flight programming. But, some hub airports are congested and their flight delays increase considerably because of flow concentration in these networks, especially during peak hours. Common capacitated hub location models cannot prevent this deficiency. In order to handle this problem, in the present study, each runway of an airport is considered as a M/G/1 queuing system, individually. Then, triple submodels for obtaining the optimal capacity of landing, takeoff, and hybrid runways are proposed, separately. These optimal capacities in the final model limit the probability of the presence of a determined number of planes on each runway. In the final proposed model, besides overcoming this deficiency, we have determined a procedure for allocating each kind of plane to each runway. On the other hand, the diversity of planes, as an influential factor in designing networks, has been also introduced in this study for the first time. A computational result on the US domestic air transportation network in 2004 during peak hours demonstrates that the proposed models in this study can ensure a more balanced workload among hubs.
Also, previous studies in the field of hub location problems have concentrated on flow and network construction costs. There are wide research gaps in this field, where the main challenges of real life are not modeled. Environmental impacts (such as air and noise pollution) and fuel shortage are important challenges in the air transportation industry. Considering the above mentioned objectives, we have proposed a new multi-objective model, based on three economic, environmental and energy criteria, to solve the capacitated multiple allocation hub location problem (CMAHLP). Efficient solutions are obtained using the  -constraint method, while the grouping AHP approach is used for selecting the preferred solution. A computational result on the US domestic air transportation network is presented.

