Background: Embryo transfer has received little clinical attention and has been the most inefficient
step in in-vitro fertilization (IVF). Recent reports have suggested that an awareness of the position
and length of the uterus during embryo transfer might be helpful in improving pregnancy rate.
Objectives: The main objective of the present study was to determine the relation between the
length and position of the uterus during embryo transfer and pregnancy rate.
Materials and Methods: Patients were randomly allocated to two groups. In case group A (n=40)
length of uterus was measured at the day of oocytes collection and the position of uterus was
determined. In the control group, Group B, (n=40) the length and position of uterus were not
investigated. The embryo transfer catheter was advanced to 5 mm from uterine fondues based on
the previously determined cavity length in group A. The embryo transfer procedures ( IVF/ICSI) at
48 hours after oocytes collection was done. The outcome of the treatment cycle in two groups was
investigated. Data analysis was performed by using chi-square, fisher-exact and ANOVA tests. The
statistical significant was defined (P?0.05).
Results: There were no significant differences in the mean age (28.5+4.4, 27.8+6.2), and duration
of infertility (7+3.4, 8.7+5.4). The pregnancy rate was not significantly different with respect to
position and length of uterus. The pregnancy rate in case groups was 25% and in control group was
22.5%, the difference was not significant (P= 0.792). In both groups, there were ectopic peregnancy
and in fact he incidence of ectopic pregnancy, per reported clinical pregnancy, was highest in group
A (14.9%) in comparison with group B (1.8%).
Conclusion: The pregnancy rate was not significantly different in the two groups. Misdirecting the
embryo transfer can not be avoided by an accurate knowledge of the position or length of uterine at
the time of oocytes retrieval. Further studies are required to evaluate the role of length and position
of uterus related to the pregnancy rate.
