Background: The cryopreservation of human oocyte would make a significant contribution to infertility treatment, such as using it for oocyte donation and for patients a bout to lose ovarian function due to surgery or chemotherapy. Despite of using standard freezing straws and cryovials or even open pulled straws, only a few successful pregnancies have been arisen from cryopreserved human oocytes. This situation has been primarily attributed to poor survival, fertilization and development of cryopreserved oocytes. Objective: The aim of this study was to evaluate the novel cryoloop vitrification method for cryopreservation of human oocytes. Materials and Methods: Nine infertile couples participated in this study. In all women proper regulation and desensitization was done using GnRH agonist during luteal phase. Mature oocytes allocated into two groups randomly. In group I, 34 oocytes were vitrified in conventional straws, while in group II, 33 oocytes were vitrified in cryoloop. After a store time of 1-6 months the oocytes were thawed, incubated for 2 hours and subsequently the ICSI was done on survived oocytes. To verify normal fertilization of vitrified oocytes the number of pronuclei in the cytoplasm was counted 16-18 hours after ICSI and good morphological quality embryos were transferred on day 2 or 3 after sperm injection. Pregnancy was identified by the serum B HCG level, checked 14 days after embryo transfer. Results: The present study shows that the rate of survival of vitrified human oocytes in two groups has no significant difference (52.94% in group I versus 63.63% in group II) but the fertilization rate of vitrified oocytes by cryoloop was greater than vitrified oocytes by conventional straws (73.7% versus 55.55% respectively). One of the embryo transfers achieved clinical pregnancy and resulted in the delivery of healthy baby. Conclusion: Vitrification by using cryoloop can improved the fertilization rate and developmental capacity of vitrified thawed oocyte
