Background: Today there is a rise in the number of newborns conceived by artificial reproductive
techniques (ART). Numerous studies have been performed on the perinatal outcome of these pregnancies.
However, there is limited data about the condition of health of these newborns in Iran.
Objective: Regarding the higher prevalence of probable complications and symptomatic congenital
anomalies, we aimed to determine the state of health of newborns born by ART.
Materials and methods: A total of 109 newborn who were conceived through ART and 479 newborns of
spontaneous conception were enrolled into our study.
The study was prospective, case-control study in Tehran, Iran, from March 2003 to March 2004. Both
case and control groups were adjusted in regard to race, sex, type of delivery, chronic disease of mother,
age of mother, and antenatal steroids administration. All newborns were examined by neonatologist after
birth and their outcome were followed until hospital discharge or death.
Data pertaining to clinical and laboratory findings of newborns and death were entered into a
questionnaire and subsequently analyzed by appropriate statistical tests. Confidence interval was 95%.
Results : Prematurity, low birth weight (LBW), very low birth weight (VLBW), twins and triplets, small
for gestational age (SGA), need for resuscitation at birth, respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) and NICU
admission were significantly higher among newborns born after ART than those born through
spontaneous conception (p < 0.05). Regression logistic analysis showed that RDS and NICU admission
were more strongly associated with weight at birth and gestational age than with method of conception.
However, increased rate of SGA in the case group was associated with multiple pregnancy. Also, there
was no significant statistical relationship between the method of conception and the prevalence of
congenital anomalies, large for gestational age (LGA), congenital pneumonia, necrotizing entrocolitis
(NEC), respiratory air leakage syndromes (ALS), hydrops fetalis, hyperbilirubinemia sepsis, meconium
aspiration syndrome (MAS), isseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC), cardiac failure, lung
hemorrhage, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia and hemolysis.
Conclusion: Newborns who were conceived by ART were more likely in need of resuscitation at birth
regardless of other factors. Furthermore, newborns born after ART were at higher risk of developing
prematur birth, LBW, and multiple birth.
