
                                                                    Background
                                                                            The freezing of immature testis tissue and then the transplant of it can be considered as a major step in fertility preservation for young boys with cancer.
                                                                                                        Objectives
                                                                            The objective of this study was to investigate antioxidant effects of vitamins E and C on testis tissue structure in the two types of freezing-thawing (fast and slow).
                                                                                                        Materials and Methods
                                                                            In this experimental study, 16 immature male mice (6 to 8 day-old) surgery, and testes were removed. The testes were divided randomly into 4 groups: control group and three experimental groups including: vitamin E, vitamins C and vitamins E and C. Testes placed in 4 prepared freezing solutions. These solutions, which were: 0.1 mM solution of vitamin E, 1 mM solution of vitamin C, solution of the vitamins E and C with mentioned doses and control solution, were prepared in the DMEM (Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium) base culture. Of each group were 4 testes into fast freezing-thawing procedure and 4 testes were into slow freezing-thawing procedure. Finally these testes, for analyzing injury, were stained with hematoxylin-eosin.
                                                                                                        Results
                                                                            In the fast freezing-thawing procedure, seminiferous tubules injury significantly reduced in any of the three experimental groups compared to the control group (P = 0.01). At the slow freezing-thawing procedure, seminiferous tubules injury any of the three experimental groups significantly reduced compared to the control group (P = 0.01). In both procedures, there was no significant difference between the three experimental groups.
                                                                                                        Conclusions
                                                                            It seems that vitamins E and C due to its antioxidant properties protects seminiferous tubules from oxidative injury.
                                                                                                
