Objective: This study examined the in vivo differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) into insulin producing cells (IPCs) on electrospun poly-L-lactide acid (PLLA) scaffolds
coated with Matricaria chammomila L. (chamomile) oil.
Materials and Methods: In this interventional, experimental study adipose MSCs
(AMSCs) were isolated from 12 adult male New Zealand white rabbits and characterized
by flow cytometry. AMSCs were subsequently differentiated into osteogenic
and adipogenic lines. Cells were seeded onto either a PLLA scaffold (control) or
PLLA scaffold coated with chamomile oil (experimental). A total of 24 scaffolds were
inserted into the pancreatic area of each rabbit and placement was confirmed by
ultrasound. After 21 days, immunohistochemistry analysis of insulin-producing like
cells on protein levels confirmed insulin expression of insulin producing cells (IPSCs).
Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) determined the expressions of genes
related to pancreatic endocrine development and function.
Results: Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) results confirmed the existence
of oil on the surface of the PLLA scaffold. The results showed a new peak
at 2854 cm-1 for the aliphatic CH2 bond. Pdx1 expression was 0.051 ± 0.007 in the
experimental group and 0.009 ± 0.002 in the control group. There was significantly
increased insulin expression in the scaffold coated with chamomile oil (0.09 ± 0.001)
compared to control group (0.063 ± 0.009, P?0.05). Both groups expressed Ngn3
and Pdx1 specific markers and pancreatic tissue was observed at 21 days post transplantation.
Conclusion: The pancreatic region is an optimal site for differentiation of AMSCs to IPCs.
Chamomile oil (as an antioxidant agent) can affect cell adhesion to the scaffold and increase
cell differentiation. In addition, the oil may lead to increased blood glucose uptake
in pathways in the muscles, liver and fatty tissue of a diabetic animal model by some probable
molecular mechanisms.
