Context and objective: One of the most important police effectiveness
and efficiency factors is this organization’s capability in establishing the
order, security and reduction of non-safety feeling of citizens in the society.
According to the applied studies, a causal relationship exists between the
social capital and social security so that by strengthening the social capital
may promote the social security.
Procedure: The methodology of study is applied-survey that has been
performed by Delphi method and by means of seven-point scale of Likert
and its objective is localizing the aspects, elements and indices of social
capital in the police stations of Tehran. The reliability of the scale was
calculated equal to 92% according to the alpha coefficient of Cronbach
and its validity was determined by the professors of IRI University of Police.
Considering the theoretical fundamentals of this study, the aspects of this
model have been limited in three aspects including structural, normative
and cognitive aspects of social capital.
Findings: According to Delphi method and academic ability of professors
of IRI University of Police, the aspects of social capital were indicated.
Consequently, 32 indications had appropriate weight mean and factor
loading in the police stations of Tehran and 32 indications were eliminated
from respective model due to the lack of required factor loading.
Conclusion: According to this study, indices such as the employees’ ease
to access the organizational managers level, expressing the realities
and presenting the performance report by the managers, continuous
interaction between managers of Police Organization and employees,
employees belief in the qualification and capability of police managers and
managers’ material and intellectual support from the police employees
466
8 ? Police Management Researchs Quarterly, V7, Number 3, Autumn 1391 (2012)
? چكيدها نگليسي
efforts had appropriate weight mean and highest factor loading and indices
including persuasion of people to the participation in the social decisionmaking,
binding the governmental managers upon their obligations to
the society, expressing the realities and presenting the performance
report by the governmental managers, honestly communication of
governmental managers with the people, establishing the strong and
healthy administrative system, stabilizing the moral and human values in
the society and behavior together with justice and fairness to the whole
people had appropriate weight mean and highest factor loading.
