Objective: Electroporation can be a highly efficient method for introducing the foreign
genetic materials into the targeted cells for transient and/or permanent genetic
modification. Considering the application of this technique as a very efficient method
for drug, oligonucleotide, antibody and plasmid delivery for clinical applications and
production of transgenic animals, the present study aimed to optimize the transfection
efficiency of sheep testicular cells including spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs)
via electroporation.
Materials and Methods: This study is an experimental research conducted in Biotechnology
Research Center (Avicenna Research Institute, Tehran, Iran) from September
2013 to March 2014. Following isolation and propagation of one-month lamb
testicular cells (SSCs and somatic testicular cells including; Sertoli, Leydig, and
myoid cells), the effect of different electroporation parameters including total voltages
(280, 320, and 350 V), burst durations (10, 8, and 5 milliseconds), burst modes
(single or double) and addition of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were evaluated on
transfection efficiency, viability rate and mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) of sheep
testicular cells.
Results: The most transfection efficiency was obtained in 320 V/8 milliseconds/single
burst group in transduction medium with and without DMSO. There was a significantly
inverse correlation between transfection efficiency with application of both following parameters:
addition of DMSO and double burst. After transfection, the highest and lowest
viability rates of testicular cells were demonstrated in 320 V/8 milliseconds with transduction
medium without DMSO and 350 V/5 milliseconds in medium containing DMSO. Addition
of DMSO to transduction medium in all groups significantly decreased the viability
rate. The comparison of gene expression indicated that Sertoli and SSCs had the most
?uorescence intensity in 320 V/double burst/DMSO positive. However, myoid and Leydig
cells showed the maximum expression in 320 V/single burst and/or 350 V/double burst/
DMSO positive.
Conclusion: We optimized the electroporation method for transfection of sheep testicular
cells and recommended the application of 320 V/8 milliseconds/single pulse/DMSO negative
for transduction of plasmid vector into these cells. Among testicular cells, the most
external gene expression was demonstrated in SSC population.
