Food selectivity is common in children ASD and has significant
                            implications for health and quality of life. Developing more information
                            about the content and quality of the diets of children with ASD and food
                            selectivity could inform treatment. The objective of this study was to
                            describe the foods that children with autism and food selectivity eat
                            and to compare the composition of the diets of children with and without
                            food selectivity. Data from 54 participants collected during a larger
                            longitudinal survey study was analyzed. Parents of children with ASD
                            completed a food inventory marking foods that their child had accepted
                            over the past month. They also described the particular presentation
                            (e.g. texture, particular plate) required for their child to eat the
                            food. The compositions of the diet including the percentage of each food
                            group in total diet and the percentage of empty calories in the total
                            diet of the food repertoires of the children who accepted 20 or less
                            compared to greater than 20 foods was analyzed using independent t-test.
                            Qualitative descriptions of food presentation were analyzed using a
                            phenomenological method. Parents rated foods from each group and the top
                            rated vegetables and fruits were presented. Children who had 20 or less
                            foods in their diet repertoire had a significantly lower percentage of
                            vegetables and fruits, and a significantly higher percentage of dairy
                            and grain/potato/snack foods than children with more than 20 foods as
                            part of their regular diet. Also, children with 20 or less foods had a
                            greater percentage of empty calories in their total diet compared to the
                            children who had greater than 20 foods. Themes developed from the
                            parents description of food presentation required to accept food
                            included the visual presentation of the food and that food could not be
                            mixed or touch other foods. Information about which foods children with
                            ASD and food selectivity accept could help inform decisions about which
                            foods to introduce first in treatment. The fact that the children with
                            fewer foods in their repertoire have a smaller percentage of whole
                            vegetables and fruits in their total diet and more empty calories may
                            have implications for future health outcomes.
