Background: Gel polymers are considered as new dosimeters for determining
radiotherapy dose distribution in three dimensions.
Objective: The ability of a new formulation of MAGIC-f polymer gel was assessed by experimental measurement and Monte Carlo (MC) method for studying the
effect of gold nanoparticles (GNPs) in prostate dose distributions under the internal
Ir-192 and external 18MV radiotherapy practices.
Method: A Plexiglas phantom was made representing human pelvis. The GNP shaving 15 nm in diameter and 0.1 mM concentration were synthesized using chemical
reduction method. Then, a new formulation of MAGIC-f gel was synthesized. The fabricated gel was poured in the tubes located at the prostate (with and without the GNPs)
and bladder locations of the phantom. The phantom was irradiated to an Ir-192 source
and 18 MV beam of a Varian linac separately based on common radiotherapy procedures used for prostate cancer. After 24 hours, the irradiated gels were read using a
Siemens 1.5 Tesla MRI scanner. The absolute doses at the reference points and isodose
curves resulted from the experimental measurement of the gels and MC simulations
following the internal and external radiotherapy practices were compared.
Results: The mean absorbed doses measured with the gel in the presence of the
GNPs in prostate were 15% and 8 % higher than the corresponding values without the
GNPs under the internal and external radiation therapies, respectively. MC simulations
also indicated a dose increase of 14 % and 7 % due to presence of the GNPs, for the
same experimental internal and external radiotherapy practices, respectively.
Conclusion: There was a good agreement between the dose enhancement factors
(DEFs) estimated with MC simulations and experiment gel measurements due to the
GNPs. The results indicated that the polymer gel dosimetry method as developed and
used in this study, can be recommended as a reliable method for investigating the DEF
of GNPs in internal and external radiotherapy practices.
