In this paper, we consider and examine alternate finite element computational strategies for time-dependent
Navier–Stokes equations describing high-speed compressible flows with shocks in a viscous and conducting
medium, with the ultimate objective of establishing the desired features of a general mathematical and
computational framework for such initial value problems (IVP) in which: (a) the numerically computed
solutions are in agreement with the physics of evolution described by the governing differential equations
(GDEs) i.e. the IVP, (b) the solutions are admissible in the non-discretized form of the GDEs in the
pointwise sense (i.e. anywhere and everywhere) in the entire space–time domain, and hence in the integrated
sense as well, (c) the numerical approximations progressively approach the same global differentiability
in space and time as the theoretical solutions, (d) it is possible to time march the solutions (this is
essential for efficiency as well as ensuring desired accuracy of the computed solution for the current
increment of time, i.e. to minimize the error build up in the time marching process), (e) the computational
process is unconditionally stable and non-degenerate regardless of the choice of discretization, nature of
approximations and their global differentiability and the dimensionless parameters influencing the physics
of the process, (f) there are no issues of stability, CFL number limitations and (g) the mathematical and
computational methodology is independent of the nature of the space–time differential operators.
We consider one-dimensional compressible flow in a viscous and conducting medium with shocks as
model problems to illustrate various features of the general mathematical and computational framework
used here and to demonstrate that the proposed framework is general and is applicable to all IVP. The
Riemann shock tube with a single diaphragm serves as a model problem. The specific details presented in
the paper discuss: (1) Choice of the form of the GDEs, i.e. strong form or weak form. (2) Various choices
of variables. The paper establishes and considers density, velocity and temperature as variables of choice.
(3) Details of the space–time least squares (LS) integral forms (meritorious over all others in all aspects)
are presented and choice of approximation spaces are discussed. (4) In all numerical studies we consider a
viscous and conducting medium with ideal gas law, however results are also presented for non-conducting
