Purpose and background: Inter-agency communications approach with an emphasis on security improvement means that along with the police, they are contributing formal and informal social institutions and organizations in providing and maintaining public safety and security. Therefore, the main objective of this research is identifying and explaining the function of formal and informal organizations outside the police, with emphasis on the role of "each of the NGOs" and "methods and communication of the police with the above mentioned organizations pin promoting public security in the Bandar Abbas Township.
Method: The research method is descriptive-analytical base on a survey approach. Statistical population of the study consists of all managers, officers and internal and external experts of Iranian police, elite and judicial authorities in the province that had an authority or responsibility in the Bandar Abbas Township. Due to the limited number of the statistical population of research (200 people), was used a total sampling method. Reliability of research instrument was calculated by use of the Cronbach's alpha coefficients.
Results and Conclusion: The findings of the research show that Public Security of households in the city of Bandar Abbas is at moderate level. Respectively, 65 and 64 percent of the experts are agreeing with the presence of NGOs and the Islamic Council in security providing in the Bandar Abbas. It is necessary for police organization to take priority the cultural and informational levels. Police two-way communication with NGOs Is effective, 80 percent higher than single-sided linear relationship between the police; interpersonal practices are more applicable to strengthen and solidify relationships with NGOs and media practices are more applicable for consultative and public awareness. The result of this research it shows that among the organizations, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), basij and city councils have a greater role in the conduct of security along the coast to interact with police.

