Objective: The present study aimed to simultaneously evaluate the association between
expression of three potential factors [post-acrosomal sheath WW domain-binding
protein (PAWP), phospholipase C? (PLC?), and truncated form of the kit receptor
(TR-KIT)] as candidates of oocyte activation with fertilization rate and early embryonic
development.
Materials and Methods: In this experimental study, semen samples were collected
from 35 intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) candidates and analyzed according
to World Health Organization criteria (2010). Each sample was divided into two
parts. The first part was processed for insemination by density-gradient centrifugation
(DGC) and the second part was prepared for assessment of sperm morphology
(Papanicolaou staining), DNA fragmentation [transferase dUTP nick end labeling
(TUNEL)], and three Sperm-borne oocyte-activating factor (s) (SOAFs)-PLC?, PAWP,
and TR-KIT.
Results: Significant positive correlations existed between the percentages of PLC?,
PAWP, and TR-KIT with fertilization rate. In addition, significant negative correlations
existed between the percentage of DNA fragmentation with the percentages of PLC?
and PAWP. We did not find a relationship between percentages of PLC?, PAWP, and
TR-KIT with embryo quality and pregnancy rate (P > 0.05). There was a significant
negative correlation between percentage of DNA fragmentation with fertilization and
embryo quality.
Conclusion: Oocyte activation was associated with the studied sperm factors (PAWP,
PLC?, and TR-KIT). These factors might hold the potential to be considered as diagnostic
factors in the assessment of semen samples to evaluate their potential to induce oocyte
activation. In addition, we observed a significant association between DNA fragmentation
with fertilization, as well as embryo quality and expression of PAWP and PLC?, which
indicated that men with high degrees of DNA fragmentation might require artificial oocyte
activation. Whether such action should take place, and its cost and benefits should be
evaluated in the future.
