Factors affecting the preoperative anxiety from the patients ' perspective

Ramin Ravangard, Peivand Bastani*, Asra Moradi, Mahdiehsadat Ahmadzadeh

Health Human Resource Research Center, School of Management and Information Sciences, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

* Corresponding author e-mail: bastanip@sums.ac.ir

Abstract
Background and Objective: Anxiety is considered as a common complaint in patients admitted for surgery, as well as a deterrent, and an important factor influencing the patients' resistance to the required surgeries. This study aimed to determine the effective factors influencing the preoperative anxiety from the perspective of patients referred to the operation rooms of general hospitals affiliated to Shiraz University of Medical Sciences in 2015.

Materials and Methods: This research was an applied, cross-sectional and descriptive-analytical study conducted in general hospitals affiliated to Shiraz University of Medical Sciences in 2015. The study population included 150 adult patients before performing their surgeries. The required data were collected using a questionnaire designed by Nazari-Vanani and colleagues. The collected data were analyzed using SPSS22 and through the Pearson correlation coefficient, independent t-test and ANOVA tests at a significance level of 0.05.

Results: The Findings showed that the highest and lowest means of preoperative anxiety were, respectively, related to preoperative concerns (27.4 ± 7.5) and stressors related to the physical environment of the operating rooms (14.9 ± 6.3). Also, factors such as age, sex, occupation, need to see a psychologist, and the number of surgeries in the past had significant relationship with the preoperative anxiety (p < 0.05).

Conclusion: According to the present results, the preoperative anxiety can be decreased through familiarizing patients with the physical environment and the medical staff working in the operating room before performing surgeries, applying induction room located next to the operation room performing anesthetizing process.

Keywords: Anxiety, Operating room, Stressors, Hospital.


