This article has been done having the objective of proposed principles regarding the role
of urban decline areas and being impressionable in reducing crime. It was an investigation on urban
crimes in decline areas, and finally the implementation of an approach that will lead to the creation of
a healthy city. The result of this article is application of the urbanization principles aiming at having a
healthy areas in designing cities’ which not only improves urban environment security but also leave
good memories in mental images of citizens. This article analyzes decline areas of Tehran’s 5th district
through renovation of urban decline areas and creating a safe urban environments; this happens through
examining the case under study with a holistic approach. For this purpose, the desirability of decline areas
and finally the role of decline area of Tehran’s 5th district has been examined in creation of challenges in
Tehran urban management according to the conducted studies of the target area, the relationship between
living in outskirts and crime rates, the link among improvement patterns, reconstruction of decline areas
and citizen participation and the relationship between the organizing facade, glazing and skyline based on
a detailed plan. Some results of this paper are as follows: Sustainable renovation is not possible without
understanding and concentration on the social, cultural and economic structure. Furthermore, without
attracting the real participation of owners, having access to desired improvement will not be fulfilled.
Followed by the full attention of city’s custodians and police which reduces the vulnerability of these
areas. The current situation of decline areas in the case under study is in an unsuitable condition and the
uncontrolled growth of ugly pattern which has brought dissatisfaction for citizens. Research method was
descriptive-analytic data collection and the research has been done through questionnaires, interview,
observation, and library study. The analysis of the obtained data has been done by the utilization of SPSS
software and LISREL, and the results of this examination show the important role of decline area’s
renovation in increasing security and reducing crime.
