Introduction: Febrile convulsion is the most common seizure disorder and cause of hospital admissions in emergency and neurology wards. This disease due to the combination of two important phenomenon at one time in child causes disorder in family life, stress and anxiety. It also causes irreversible harm to the health of child. Due to the high prevalence of febrile seizures, the need to conduct a study to determine the knowledge and practice of mothers of children with and without recurrence seemed necessary and by identifying these factors, prevention of future attacks, its complications and high costs of treatment, an effective step can be taken to improve children's health.
Objective: This study aimed to compare knowledge and practice of mothers of children with febrile convulsion with or without recurrence referring to one of educational-therapeutic centers in Rasht city. 
Methods: This is a descriptive-comparative study. Samples included 156 mothers with 6 months to 6 year old children with febrile convulsion (78 patients in each group with and without relapse) referring to one of educational-therapeutic centers in Rasht city. Samples were chosen by referring to patient files as well as the follow-up patients from neurology clinic. Samples were chosen by simple and convenience sampling method. Data collection instrument consisted of a two-part questionnaire including demographic information for parents and children and a researcher made questionnaire on mothers' knowledge and practice. In order to determine the instrument validity, 10 faculty members commented on content validity. Content validity of the questionnaire to all terms was more than 0.7 and content validity index was between 0.7 to 1. Test re-test method was used to detecting reliability of questionnaire respectively 10 samples completed the questionnaire twice within a week. The test-retest reliability of the outer top 90%. After collecting information and using descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) and analytical statistics (t-test, chi-square, Mann-Whitney, regression) were analyzed.
Results:
The findings show that the majority of samples group with and without recurrence were male. The average age of children in the group without recurrence 35/4 ± 17/85(months) group, in the group with recurrence 41/85 ± 18/32(months). 62/8% of the subjects in the group without recurrence, 58/97% groups, with recurrence were first child. The mean knowledge score of them others of children without recurrence 29.5± 3.8 more than the mothers of children with relapsed 28.1± 3.9 is. This difference is statistically significant (P  < 0/023). The mean performance score them others of children without recurrence (8.58 ±1.68) More than Mothers children with recurrent (8.48± 1.64) is. This difference was not statistically significant. To analyze the relationship between knowledge and practice with relapsing logistic regression models were used. The results of the model showed that the relationship between knowledge and practice, knowledge is regarded as a predictor of recurrence.)0R=0/908 CI95% =0/835 to 0/988).   
Conclusion: In this study only predictor, the knowledge of mothers. Poor maternal awareness about diseases due to poor performance and Followed by the repeated seizures. Given the importance of the issue to prevent the occurrence of febrile seizures in children in the first place, should be trained community health nurses in health centers for pregnant women and mothers of infants’ seizures before they happen.

