Introduction: Nowadays maintaining mental health in stressful conditions and occupations, apart from reducing sources of stress, strengthening interpersonal resources such as hardiness and resilience is considered.  
Objectives: Present study aimed to determine the relationship of psychological hardiness and resiliency with mental health in pre-hospital emergency technicians in Guilan Province.
Method: This is a cross-sectional study conducted in 2013 on 70 male technicians working in pre-hospital emergency in Guilan province with at least education level of diploma to bachelor degree using Demographic Inventory, Ahvaz Hardiness Inventory (AHI), Connor Davidson Resilience (CD-RIS) and General Health Questionnaire (GHQ 28). Samples were chosen randomly from 35 pre-hospital emergency wards from a total of 53 wards Data were collected were selected randomly from overall 53 pre-hospital emergency wards and questionnaire were completed by 70 employed technicians. Stepwise multiple regression analysis was used for statistical analysis.
Results: A significant relationship was shown between hardiness and resiliency and mental health (p < 0.001). As the score of sample increased in hardiness and resiliency, their condition of mental health became better and their score decreased in somatic signs, anxiety, social dysfunction and depression. Also regarding the predictive ability of two variables of psychological hardiness and resiliency in predicting mental health, regression square indicated that these two variables can significantly establish mental health changes. The weight of resilience (t= -2.225, B= -0.149, P < 0.001) together with variable hardiness can change mental health of samples which in case of generalization to society has the weight of resiliency B= - 0.35. In attention to negative Beta, by increasing the score of resiliency, the score of mental health decreases. The lower score in GHQ shows better mental health. Therefore the greater a person's resilience, the less the physical signs, stress, social disorders and depression resulting in increase of mental health level. The weight of hardiness(P < 0.001, t= -2.225, B=-0.399) also showed that together with resilience can establish changes related to mental health of samples and if generalized to study community the weight of resilience would be Beta= -0.288. Finally as one's resilience increases, mental health also increases. The predictive formula of mental health based on these two variables is: 
mental health = 7.261-0.419 (score of resilience) -0.399 (score of hardiness)
Conclusion: The findings indicate that hardiness and resiliency are important and fundamental in the preservation and promotion of mental health in pre-hospital emergency technicians. Hardiness and resiliency.

