Abstract
Introduction: Due to the unfavorable condition of sport infrastructure in Iran, including locations, equipment, facilities, and
accessories, athletes and coaches are at an increased risk of accidents and injuries. One of the main tools for protecting athletes in
case of accidents is insurance. The objective of this study was to determine the status of sports insurance from the perspective
of injured athletes and sports administrators in Chaharmahal Va Bakhtiyari Province, Iran.
Methods: This applied and descriptive study was conducted through field surveys in 2014. The study population consisted of
injured sport administrators and athletes in Chaharmahal va Bakhtiari Province (64 managers and 278 athletes). From among
them, 103 athletes and 42 officials were selected through convenience sampling. The data gathering tool was a researchermade
questionnaire consisting of two parts; one part related to the success rate of insurance plans and the other on problems and
obstacles to a successful insurance coverage. The validity of the questionnaire was confirmed by sports management
professionals, sports medicine experts, and insurance management experts. Its reliability was calculated using Cronbach’s alpha
which was equal to 0.84. Data analysis was carried out using descriptive and inferential statistics.
Results: From the managers’ perspective, the Federation of Sports’ Medicine has not shown a significantly favorable
performance in regards to mandatory sports’ insurance. Moreover, from the athletes’ perspective, the Federation of Sports’
Medicine has only been significantly successful in the prevention dimension (P  <  0.05).
Conclusion: Based on the findings of this study, the Federation of Sports’ Medicine, as the organization responsible for the
development of technical and medical services in sports, must create favorable conditions for success in the treatment and
prevention of sports related incidents and provision of administrative services.
Keywords: Sport Insurance; Athletes; Sport Injuries
