Abstract
Introduction: Despite the great importance of comprehensive evaluation of mobile health services, as a part of novel health
services, most researches have only focused on the evaluation of the technical aspects and have neglected other aspects of these
services. The main objective of this study was the identification and prioritization of the indicators and dimensions of mobile
health systems’ quality by considering all critical aspects including technical, information, and interactive dimensions.
Methods: This applied and descriptive study was conducted through survey method. A questionnaire was used to collect data the
validity of which was confirmed by academic experts. The statistical population of the study included experts of health services
quality evaluation with emphasis on mobile health with more than 3 years of experience in this field. Using judgmental sampling
(non- probability purposive sampling), 28 subjects were selected and questionnaires were distributed among them. The content
validity of the scale was confirmed by experts and its reliability was approved through calculation of inconsistency rate for all
pairwise comparison matrixes (less than 0.1). The collected data were analyzed using the analytic hierarchy process in Expert
Choice Software.
Results: The interaction quality dimension was the most important among the dimensions of quality assessment of mobile health
services. In addition, the indicators of privacy, effectiveness, safety, real-time performance, accountability, after-sales service, and
patient-centered services were respectively, the most important quality indicators.
Conclusion: It is necessary to study mobile health services in the context of other health services and not just simply as software.
The success of a mobile health system is based, first, on the quality of general health service indicators such as accountability,
patient-centered services, and privacy, and then, on the quality of software system indicators. Therefore, it is necessary for all
stakeholders to be involved in the process of designing a mobile health service in order to improve the chances of success.
Keywords: Mobile Health; Analytic Hierarchy Process; Quality Evaluation
