 Background: Idiopathic congenital clubfoot is a deformity with
                            various components. Its treatment can be conservative and or surgical in
                            order to eliminate the deformity and to obtain a pain-free foot allowing
                            for adequate mobility. Objectives: Our objective was to evaluate whether
                            neuromuscular electrostimulation is useful for improving peroneal muscle
                            strength in post-operative congenital clubfoot in children. Patients and
                            Methods: An experimental, prospective, longitudinal, and comparative
                            study was carried out on 10 patients with congenital clubfoot in the
                            experimental group, and on 10 for historical controls. Initial and
                            post-treatment clinical evaluations were conducted on patients in both
                            groups. Surface electromyography (SEMG) was used for the experimental
                            group; each patient received 30 sessions of treatment with neuromuscular
                            electrostimulation in order to obtain muscular contraction. Results: In
                            both groups, there were more males with the average age or 5.5 years
                            (ranging from 3 to 8 years of age). Peroneal muscular strength evaluated
                            through the Daniels and Worthingham’s test increased post-treatment only
                            in the experimental group, and comparing these results to those of the
                            historical group, a significance level of P = 0.001 was obtained. The
                            motor unit potential amplitude in the SEMG increased in the experimental
                            group with a significance level of P &lt; 0.05. Conclusions:
                            Neuromuscular electrostimulation can be used to increase muscle
                            strength, and it is a safe and painless treatment. 
