Measuring livestock growers’ satisfaction and awareness from their expectation can play a significant role in loyalty regarding this job which has lead food security and an element for reducing ruralurban migration. Satisfaction measurement may be considered the most reliable feedback system, considering that it provides in an effective, direct, meaningful and objective way to analyze the persons ‘preferences and expectations. In light of these facts, in 1989, the Swedish Customer Satisfaction Barometer was introduced as a tool for companies to assess efforts in achieving customer satisfaction. The successful experience of the SCSB has inspired the creation of the American Customer Satisfaction index. The model measures the causeandeffect relationship that runs from the antecedents of satisfaction level (expectation, perceived quality, and perceived value) to its consequences (complaints and loyalty). Perceived quality has been perhaps the most explored topic in service marketing and levels of satisfaction are mainly determined by it. Individual expectation is second construct that affects perceived quality, perceived value, and satisfaction. However, the significance of these relations is questioned in the literature. We therefore use instead the construct “Attitude” which is motivated next. Perceived value is conceptualized as the consumer&#039;s evaluation of the utility of perceived benefits and perceived sacrifices. Perceived value to be both a rating of the price or prices paid for the quality received and a rating of the quality received for the price or prices paid. Satisfaction is fundamental to the practice of individual sovereignty as a forth variable. Satisfaction is widely recognized as a key influence in the formation of individual’ future intentions and finally loyalty is result of satisfaction. Loyalty has been defined as a ‘‘deeply held commitment to rebuy or repatronize a preferred product/service consistently in the future. The relationship between satisfaction and loyalty has gained much attention in marketing literature; there is now substantial evidence that higher satisfaction levels lead to higher intentions and loyalty is considered important because of its positive effect on longterm profitability. In light of these facts, the aim of this paper is to investigate and measure livestock growers’ satisfaction with their job and to better understand the determinants of satisfaction of growers’ satisfaction, which should ultimately lead to a better understanding of why growers’ satisfaction continue or leave livestock growing.
Research method
As such, this survey research was conducted to investigate the factors affecting livestock growers’ satisfaction with adaption of western satisfaction model and application of path analysis technique in Lorestan province. Although the success of the ACSI in terms of predicting satisfaction and loyalty has been proven the theory has not stopped evolving, and other scientists have expressed the belief that for some behaviors and contexts, the inclusion of other variables might increase the predictive utility of the model. As such we added, image and commitment to the model.
The data was gathered using a questionnaire based on a facetoface survey of livestock growers through the August, 2012. Simple random sampling was used to select 120 livestock growers as the research sample size. The respondents were assured about the anonymity and confidentiality. They were also given the right to refuse to participate, to refuse to answer any question they deemed to be too sensitive or that they felt uncomfortable about. Those declining to participate were replaced by another student. No payment was made to the respondents. Answering time for the questionnaire was about 25–30 min. The responses were returned back to the researchers directly after completion without any intermediaries. All questionnaires were checked to make sure responses were complete. The needed date was collected through personal interviews using a structured questionnaire. An indepth literature review was used to develop the study questionnaire. A 6point scale for all the variables was used to reduce the statistical problem of extreme skewness. Based on Ajzen&#039;s (1985) recommendations, scales containing multiple items (statements) were developed to measure each of the aforementioned psychosocial variables. The validity of the questionnaire, then, was approved by a panel of experts. Additionally, Cronbach alpha reliability coefficients in the final sample for all scales indicated the reliability of goodtoexcellent, generally 0.6 to 0.8.
Finding
To obtain a better understanding of the relationship between various variables of the model, a Pearson correlation test was run. According to the correlation matrix, there is a significant positive relationship between all variables except between image and perceived quality. The coefficients do not show any significant relationship between livestock growing image, and perceived quality of this job. The results also imply that moral norm positively related to attitude, selfidentity and intention. Furthermore, the research findings showed that attitude regarding husbandry and commitment to it had the greatest direct affect on livestock growers’ satisfaction. Furthermore, loyalty regarding husbandry was determined by satisfaction and commitment about husbandry. Based on the research findings some applicable recommendations have been presented toward livestock growers’ satisfaction and loyalty regarding husbandry
