With the development of urbanization, green areas was highly regarded and was recognized as an important symbol of urban ecosystem health. Parks and green spaces plays an important role in improving the quality of life of the people living in urban areas; But the uneven distribution of parks and negligence  of the desired criteria for locating parks, makes the benefits and merits of the parks  not to be realized as optimum. District No. 3of Ahwaz, due to uneven distribution and lack of observing the regualtions of the  parks locating, is faced with the same problem; Thus, this study was conducted with the aim of locating  new parks in District 3 of Ahwaz City. To achieve the above said goal, with a practical approach and Analytical and descriptive nature, the six indicators were used which  were deriven from  the studies and expert opinions that the required information were gathered and analyzed by studying literature, previous researches, development plans of Ahvaz. And by the Analytic Network Process and network analysis tools in Arc GIS software were analyzed. Calculations showed that11 neighborhood of district No.3  of Ahwaz has no park. By comparing the standard per capita of parks in neighborhoods and the detailed plan approved in 1997 (13.4 m2) it was founded that 76.78% of neighborhoods in terms of having Park are placed at deprived and underdeveloped condition. Review of the performance radius of the parks showed that 53 percent of parks are in a good condition in providing services to the objective residents  and the remaining 47 percent are in  unfavorable condition. The findings of  locatioing  of new parks was twenty places, which the priority of their establishment was determined by the application of Super Decisions software. The results indicated that the distribution of parks is very unbalanced in district No.3 of Ahwaz City and the population density is not regarded  and the rinciples of  park locating has not been observed And for overcoming  such gap, construction of a new park is required. But the construction of new parks should be based on the existing standards in order that while providing higher performance ensures the quality of life and satisfaction of Citizens. 
