
Objective: This research aimed to study the relationship between scrupulosity and obsessivecompulsive
symptoms as well as obsessive-compulsive-related cognitive styles (obsessive
beliefs and thought-action fusion). Methods: This was a correlational study. The study population included all individuals who
referred to counseling centers of Tehran from August to December 2010 and diagnosed with
obsessive-compulsive disorder, and also all Persian speakers with OCD who were active in
internet from August to November 2012. A total of 30 individuals with obsessive-compulsive
disorder (mostly Iranian Muslims) were recruited from different psychological counseling
centers in Tehran. In addition, 50 individuals with OCD (obsessive-compulsive disorder)
were recruited via internet social networks. For screening, we used Obsessive-Compulsive
Inventory-Revised (OCI-R). Convenience method was used for the sampling. In order to
collect data, Penn Inventory of Scrupulosity (PIOS), Thought-Action Fusion Scale (TAF),
Depression Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS-21), Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory-Revised
(OCI-R), and Obsessive Beliefs Questionnaire (OBQ) were administered. Pearson correlation
coefficient and regression analysis were used to analyze the data. SPSS version 18 was used
for data analysis. Results: Results showed that there were significant relationships between scrupulosity
and obsessive-compulsive symptoms total score (r=0.275, P<0.05); also scrupulosity and
obsessive beliefs (r=0.558, P<0.01); and scrupulosity and thought-action fusion (r=0.506,
P<0.01). Results also revealed that the variations in scrupulosity scores could be best predicted
by ‘anxiety’ and ‘Importance and Control of Thoughts.’ Scrupulosity is a subtype of OCD and
is obsessive in nature. Conclusion: As explained by cognitive-behavioral theories of religious OCD, scrupulosity
is closely related to the ‘Importance of Thoughts and Controlling Thoughts,’ as well as moral
and probability ‘Thought-action Fusion.’ The results were in accordance with the findings of
comparable studies on Christian samples. Results were explained according to Islamic views,
and the implications for research and practice were discussed.

