 Background Social anxiety disorder is often related to specific
                            impairment or distress in different areas of life, including
                            occupational, social and family settings. Objective The purpose of the
                            present study was to examine the psychometric properties of the persian
                            version of the social anxiety-acceptance and action questionnaire
                            (SA-AAQ) in university students. Materials and Methods In this
                            descriptive cross-sectional study, 324 students from Shahid Beheshti
                            University of Medical Sciences participated via the cluster sampling
                            method during year 2015. Factor analysis by the principle component
                            analysis method, internal consistency analysis, and convergent and
                            divergent validity were conducted to examine the validity of the SA-AAQ.
                            To calculate the reliability of the SA-AAQ, Cronbach’s alpha and
                            test-retest reliability were used. Results The results from factor
                            analysis by principle component analysis method yielded three factors
                            that were named acceptance, action and non-judging of experience. The
                            three-factor solution explained 51.82% of the variance. Evidence for the
                            internal consistency of SA-AAQ was obtained via calculating correlations
                            between SA-AAQ and its subscales. Support for convergent and
                            discriminant validity of the SA-AAQ via its correlations with the
                            acceptance and action questionnaire - II, social interaction anxiety
                            scale, cognitive fusion questionnaire, believability of anxious feelings
                            and thoughts questionnaire, valued living questionnaire and WHOQOL- BREF
                            was obtained. The reliability of the SA-AAQ via calculating Cronbach’s
                            alpha and test-retest coefficients yielded values of 0.84 and 0.84,
                            respectively. Conclusions The Iranian version of the SA-AAQ has
                            acceptable levels of psychometric properties in university students. The
                            SA-AAQ is a valid and reliable measure to be utilized in research
                            investigations and therapeutic interventions. 
