  Objective: Mothers of children with spinabifida spend more time to care for their children . Doing this care, depending on the child's functional mobility level; can probably cause damage to physical and mental health of mothers. This study aimed to determine the quality of life (QOL) of mothers of children with spinabifida (SB), according to the Hoffer levels using the SF-36 questionnaire.   Material and Methods: This research was a descriptive- analitical, cross-sectional study. The sample of this study was consisted of mothers of children with SB (2/5– 14 years old), in Tehran. The sample were selected by convenience sampling in the Rehabilitation Outpatient Clinics of University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, that 203 mothers were assessed in one clinic. Primery measures were the Hoffer criteria for grouping and determine the levels of ambulation in children with SB and the outcome measure was SF-36 questionnaire . Data were analyzed using, t test, ANOVA and MANOVA in SPSS ( version 18).  Results : In this study, there were significant differences in mean scores on the physical component summary (PCS) (p<0/01) and Mental component summary (MCS) of SF36 (p<0/01) in mothers of children with SB in Hoffer levels. The significant difference in PCS and MCS of SF36, was related to the level I with the other levels of Hoffer criteria, there were no Significant difference in mean score for the PCS and MCS the QOL of mothers for sex and child's age levels (p < 0/05). There were a significant differences in mean PCS and MCS a QOL of mothers in different types of SB (p<0/01). This significant difference was related to aculta with meningocele and myelomeningocele (p<0/01).   Conclusion: The dimensions of PCS and MCS of SF36 of mother with SB were affected with types of SB and increasing the levels of Hoffer. In conclusion, Mothers of children with SB require paying attention to their QOL during treatment of the child. In addition,the services should be created to support the physical and psychological aspects of the QOL. 
