Ethambutol (EMB) is the first-line drug used for the treatment of
                            tuberculosis. Recent reports on the EMB-resistant isolates of
                            Mycobacterium tuberculosis in different geographical regions of the
                            world have revealed the EMB resistance patterns of M. tuberculosis and
                            mutations in the embB gene. In this study, we determined the emb locus
                            in sensitive and resistant Iranian M. tuberculosis isolates using two
                            effective methods for the detection of point mutation, i.e.,
                            single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) and direct sequencing.
                            Thirty-two M. tuberculosis isolates from the Isfahan tuberculosis center
                            were characterized by conventional methods and specific amplification of
                            the regions of difference (rd) gene and internal transcribed spacer
                            (its) gene. Observing standard operational procedures, EMB
                            susceptibility tests were performed on the LJ medium using the
                            proportion method with 2, 5, and 10 μg/mL concentrations. PCR-SSCP and
                            direct sequencing were used to detect different kinds of mutation in the
                            embB gene with precision. In a total of 32 isolates, two isolates
                            (6.25%) were found to be resistant to EMB in 2, 5, and 10 μg/mL
                            concentrations. Single-strand conformational polymorphism showed altered
                            mobility with triple bands in the resistant isolates and double bands in
                            the sensitive isolates. In the two EMB-resistant cases, mutation was
                            found to occur codons 309and 299. We concluded from the results that the
                            frequency of EMB-resistant M. tuberculosis cases in Iran is lower than
                            that of many other regions. The PCR-SSCP technique can separate
                            resistant isolates from sensitive isolates. The sequencing results of
                            this study showed mutation in codons 309 and 299 of the embB gene. In
                            none of the resistant isolates, mutation was observed in codon 306.
                            Further studies are required to determine other point mutations and
                            analyze other genetic loci associated with EMB resistance in M.
                            tuberculosis isolates in Iran.
