Background and Objective: Alzheimer is a neurodegenerative disease in which a reduced memory capacity and numerous changes occur in the patientrsquo s brain. This study was embarked to shed light on the effects of eight weeks of endurance training and lithium chloride administration on brainderived neurotrophic factor serum levels in female rats with Alzheimers disease.

Materials and Methods: 70 female Sperag Dawley rats were randomly divided into seven groups including: 1.control, 2. Sham, 3. littium chlorid[d1] e 20, 4. littium chloride 40, 5. Endurance training, 6. Endurance training littium chloride 20, 7. Endurance training and littium chloride 40. Alziemer was induced in rats by methyl chloride,. Groups of endurance training, endurance training plus littium coloride 20 and endurance training plus littium chloride 40 ran on a treadmill with no incline at the speed of 15 to 20 meters per minute for 15 to 30 minutes each session and five times for eight weeks. The groups of littium coloride 20, endurance training and littium coloride 20 received littium coloride 20 mg/kg according to their body weight per day. The littium coloride 40, endurance training and littium coloride 40 received  littium coloride 40 mg/kg of their body weight per day for 14 days.  During this period, the control group did not have any activity and did not recieve any treatment. ANOVA and tukey post hoc[d2]  tests were used for statistical analysis.

Results: The results showed that lithium chloride as well as endurance training along with their  interactive effects increased levels of brainderived neurotrophic factor poisoning by neurotoxins. But the greatest impact was observed in endurance training and lithium chloride 20. Also, serum levels of brainderived neurotrophic factor significantly decresed owing to Methyltin[d3]  poisoning in female rats (p<0.05).

Conclusion: Based on these findings, we conclude that lithium chloride, endurance training and their interactive effects in female rats with Alzheimers disease raised brainderived neurotrophic factor serum levels which implies that Alzheimers disease can be improved.
