ABSTRACT
Background and Aim: Based on TB control program, evaluation of persons in close contact with pulmonary TB patients is very important. Evaluation of assessment process and services provided to close contacts and also evaluation of defects in this process can be helpful for proper planning. In this study we evaluated the prevalence of tuberculosis among close contacts of TB patients and the services provided for them in Sanandaj during 2009-2011.
Materials and Methods: This this cross-sectional study (descriptive-analytical) included all persons in close contact with smear positive TB patients, who had been registered in TB control center of Sanandaj according to TB Country Guide, from  2009 towards the end of  2011 (three years). Data of all close contacts of the smear positive tuberculosis patients were obtained from the medical records. The close contacts were evaluated based on history and physical examination. Using SPSS software, data were analyzed by chi-square test and Fisher's exact tests. 
Results: In this study, 298 close contacts of TB patients were assessed. According to the records, 248 contact (83.1%) had been evaluated at the time of diagnosis of  tuberculosis in the patients. Also, after completion of TB patients treatment, only 111 (37.2%) members of the families had been followed. There were no statistically significant differences between male and female in regard to the services provided to the close contacts (p > 0.05). 137 (57.3%) subjects had long term contact and 102 (47.2%) had limited contact (p=0.022). Among those who had been referred to specialist, 4 (23.5%) and 13 (76.5%) subjects had long term and limited contact respectively which showed a significant difference (p=0.012). In this study one new smear positive TB patient was diagnosed. 
Conclusion: The results of this study showed that about one fifth of close contacts have not been evaluated at the time of diagnosis of TB in the patients and more than half of the contacts had not been followed. Although the percent of services for those with long term contact was higher, essential measures such as medical history and physical examination had not been implemneted. 
Keywords: Close contacts, Pulmonary tuberculosis, Iran

