Background and Objective: Psychosocial stresses are one of the causes of most clinical problemes of general health of societies. It can produce and intensify many diseases such as cardiovascular disorders. Studeise have shown this type of stress could produce free radicales and lead to oxidative stress. As regular exercise is effective in decreasing mortality from cardiovasulare dieases, immobility and obesity are the main risk factores for occurring of these diseases. 

Materials and Methods: Fifty rats were randomly divided into 5 groups: Control group, Heart failure group, Psychosocial stress and Heart failure group, Exercise and Heart failure group, and Psychosocial stress, exercise and heart failure group. Psychosocial stress was induced by change of cage-mate of animals. The rats in the training intervention groups were trained to run on a treadmill, 5 days a week for 4 weeks. Subcutaneous injection of isoproterenol (130 mg/kg) was used to induce experimental heart failure. Severity of heart failure was evaluated by functional parameters such as FS, LVEDd, LVESd, LVPWT and EF by echocardiography. Plasma levels of malondialdehyde (MDA) and pro-oxidant/antioxidant balance (PAB), as oxidative parameters and corticostrone level were also evaluated in rat serum.

Results: Psychosocial stress increased levels of PAB, MDA, corticostron and LVEDd and decreased EF, FS and LVPWT (P < 0.05). Protective effects of regular exercise was shown with decreased levels of PAB, MDA, corticostrone, and LVEDd and increased EF, FS and LVPWT in SS+Ex+ISO in comparison with SS+ISO (P < 0.05). Psychosocial stress caused more increase in serum levels of PAB and MDA in rat with heart failure (P < 0.001). Application of 4-week exercise caused more improvement in serum levels of PAB and MDA (P < 0.001). 

Conclusion: Psychosocial stress can disturbe functional indexes in heart failure, increases oxidative stress indexes and corticostrone level of serum. Regular exercise could improve some of deleterious effects of psychosocial stress. So, for experiencing more healty situation, both reduction of various stress sources and regular exercise are recommended.

