Nowadays, enterprises strive to keep transforming their business processes in accordance with fast-changing customer demands so as to survive the intense global competition. Economic globalisation and internationalisation of operations are essential factors in integration of suppliers, partners, and customers within and across national borders. The objective is to achieve integrated supply chains. In this effort, implementation of information technologies and systems, such as enterprise resource planning (ERP), facilitates the desired level of integration. Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems provide integration and optimization of various business processes, which can lead to improved planning, decision quality, and a smoother coordination between business units resulting in higher efficiency and a quicker response time to customer demands and inquiries. ERP is an enabler of business benefits and should not be viewed as a stand-alone initiative with the requirement to pay back its implementation cost. The implementation of such systems is very difficult and many projects do not meet their expectations. There are cases of successful and unsuccessful implementations. The principal reason for failure is often associated with poor management of the implementation process. This paper presents enterprise resource planning (ERP) system, implementation of enterprise information system (especially ASAP methodology), and ERP software package, known as SAP R/3. A brief overview of preventive maintenance system, SAP R/3 Plant Maintenance Module, and automated preventive maintenance system of Iran Khodro company (legacy system) are also presented. This research assesses which system (legacy system or plant maintenance module) facilitates or inhibits the success of preventive maintenance process. We carried out a poll to find out opinions of experts and users; a recent opinion poll has been the main source used for data collection. After the systems assessment by four criteria (User, Process, Master Data, Performance), we found out Plant Maintenance Module has a better operation by Process and Master Data criteria. An action is also recommended, provided that there are more SAP system customizations which can bring about better results. 
