Background and Objective: With regard to the conditions of an emergency patient and the fact that a good emergency health care can save a patient’s life, patient satisfaction levels of emergency health care must be prioritized and the emergency room is the frontline of a hospital’s health care. Despite its importance, few studies in context of factors related to patient satisfaction have been carried out in Iran. The current study has been done with the objective of measuring the level of satisfaction in an emergency health care (in Mostafa Khomeini hospital).

Materials and Methods: In this descriptive-analytical study, the satisfaction level of 400 patients with emergency health care was investigated. The patients took part in the study voluntarily. The information was gathered using questionnaires that evaluated the patient’s level of satisfaction. The answers were designed in conformity with Likert scale (great, very good, good, moderate, and bad). This study was approved in Medical Ethics Group and Research Council of Shahed University.

Results: In the current study, the patients’ level of satisfaction with the doctors, nurses, nursing services, nursing staff’s attitude, medical staff’s caring attitude, concordance with religious standards, prevention of unnecessary presence of male staff in female patient’s room and also covering the unnecessary parts of a female patient during the examination was reported above average in 100% of the patients and none of the patients evaluated these factors bad. In this study, the amount of costs, comfort care, and the available facilities, the reception staff attitude, laboratory staff, radiology staff and paraclinical services availability were among the least evaluated factors.

Conclusion: This study shows a favorable (91.3%) satisfaction in Mostafa Khomeini emergency patients. Medical staff services were evaluated highly satisfactory and the costs, emergency facilities including comfort care and paraclinical services were least evaluated. It seems that improving health insurance conditions, hospital social work, equipping hospitals with comfort care and providing hospitals with dedicated and experienced human resources are points that require most of the emergency managers’ attention.

