Background and Objective: Due to scarcity of data concerning physical disability progression in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), and the effect of combined training exercises, this study was set to compare the effects of pilates, resistance and combined (Pilates and Resistance) training on quality of life, muscular strength and fatigue in women with Multiple Sclerosis.

Materials and Methods: In this semiexperimental study, 44 women who were members of Multiple Sclerosis council in Rasht city were selected, target oriented and randomly assigned to four experimental and control groups (n=11). The experimental group participated in an 8week supervised program. Quality of life and fatigue were evaluated using Multiple Sclerosis Quality of Life Questionnaire and the modified fatigue impact scale at baseline, after 4 and 8 weeks. Muscular strength was evaluated at baseline and after 8 weeks using dynamometer. The data was analyzed using analysis of covariance and post hoc test of LSD.

Results: There was a significant difference in quality of life in&amp;nbsp; pretest scores of&amp;nbsp; the four&amp;nbsp; study groups 4 and 8 weeks after training interventions (P=0.05). Pilates training group demonstrated the highest increase in their quality of life (P=0.05). Significant statistical differences in the posttest were found in the 4 groups in terms of dominant and nondominant hand, (P=0.05). Post test results indicated significant differences in nondominant hand strength in four groups (P=0.05). In the meantime, the LSD test showed that there was a significant statistical difference between control and combined training groups (P=0.021). Scores of fatigue questionnaire did not show any statistical difference in four groups after 4 and 8 weeks (P= 0.05).

Conclusion: Pilates training had a significant effect on improving quality of life and combined training resulted in a significant increase in participants&amp;rsquo; muscular strength. Therefore, these exercises can be recommended as a complementary treatment alongside medications for Multiple Sclerosis patients.
