Background: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common complex condition in women associated with reproductive and metabolic systems and also psychological disorders. There is considerable evidence to suggest that the sympathetic nervous system is involved in PCO and metabolic syndromes. Noradrenalin (NA), corticotrophin releasing hormone (CRH) and nerve growth factor (NGF) are the strong stimulants for two axes: hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) and hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian (HPO) axes which are regulators for the female reproductive system. Following previous studies on sympathetic nervous system over activity in PCOS, the main purpose of this study is to evaluate the role of CRH and NGF as two important findings from the perspective of the psycho-emotional.

Methods: This case-control study was conducted in Reproductive Health Research Center of Imam Khomeini Hospital, Tehran, Iran in the September of 2011. 170 women participated in this study. The diagnosis of PCOS was made according to the joint criteria of the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology and the American Society of Reproductive Medicine (ESHRE/ASRM). All women have 20-40 years of age and body mass index (BMI) of less than 28. Demographic questionnaire was used in this study and blood sample was obtained from all participants before 8AM. All analysis was done in SPSS software, version 19 (IBM SPSS, Armonk, NY, USA). P-value less than 0.05 considered as significant level.

Results: Serum levels of CRH and NGF in patients with polycystic ovary was significantly lower than the control group (P< 0.001). This reduction can disrupt two neural axes: the sympathetic nervous system (SAS) and hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA). These axes have a fundamental role in psycho-emotional reactions in women with PCOS. Moreover, using demographic questionnaire quantitative and qualitative characteristics of the population studied, the results of which are reported in the regression model.

Conclusion: The results of this study confirmed previous studies. This reduction in serum levels of CRH and NGF shows the hyperactivity of sympathetic nervous system in polycystic ovary syndrome can be one of the causes of mental disorders in women with PCOS.



