The objective of Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) is to establish sustainable levels of economic and social activities in coastal areas while protecting the coastal environment. ICZM seeks to reconcile the different policies that have an effect on the coast and to establish a framework that facilitates the integration of the interests and responsibilities of those involved in the development, management and use of the coast. The coast is a link between land and sea, includes diverse geomorphologic frameworks and sedimentary environments. The coastal zone is a dynamic marine area where land and sea influence each other to a significant degree.This area is influenced by different biological, chemical and physical activites especially wind, waves, currents and tides that alter the profile of the shoreline. For the first time, coastal zone management in Iran was introduced officially about a decade ago. Ports and Maritime Organization (PMO), Environmental Protection Agency and National Center for Oceanography are institutions that carried out activities on the coastal zone management in Iran. Also Kish Free Zone Portal decided performing this project for islands under its management.Beaches of Hendurabi Island with high potential of natural resources and abundant mineral and natural talents have great importance among islands of Persian Gulf. In fact,due to the strategic location of the Hendurabi Island, politically, socially and economically, to achieve sustainable development and efficient use of island´s resources, implementation of Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM), is necessary. The Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) of Hendurabi Island composed of several executive parts such as Shoreline Management Plan, Environmental Management Plan and monitoring and evaluation plan. Directly integrated coastal management is divided into two parts: (a) Land area which is consisted of determining of hazard line. (b) marine area that determined based on the active area of sedimentary and environmental criteria.Usually retreat strategy is proposed on land to hazard line, but in islands due to the small size of the islands and land values, retreat is not the best solution and can be constructed dikes after the tidal action. Calculation of hazard line components such as wind setup, wave setup and runup,depend on relationships and parametersm but these relationships are empirical and have errors. So determining hazard line of islands have great important.In this study relationships of two valid regulations, Cem and Eurotop,investigated and sensitivity analysis was performed on the parameters. Hazard line for 5, 20 and 50 return period years, is determined with a new approach by using simple engineering relations. For the calculation, required raw data is extracted from Iran Seas Wave Modelling project. The influence of various factors around the Island, including area wind speed, wind angle, wave height, beach slope, return period on the hazard line were investigated. Results showed that determining hazard line as a part of direct Coastal Zone Management is very essential.
