Objective: The present study aimed Predicting the Metacognitive Awareness and its components based on achievement goals amongst student in Mazandaran University. The research had a descriptive correlation method. Method:The research sle comprised 300 male students selected by using randomly multistage sling. To assess related variables, Achievement Goals Questionnaire developed by Midgley et al, and Mastery Avoidance Goal Orientation Sub scale designed by Andrew et al, as well as Meta cognitive Awareness Inventory made by Schraw and Dennison were used. Results::The results from research showed that there was a significant positive relationship between achievement goals and meta cognition. Correspondingly, the relationships of meta cognitive components (knowledge of cognition, knowledge of regulation, declarative knowledge, procedural knowledge, conditional knowledge, planning, monitoring, information management, debugging and evaluation) with mastery –approach goal orientation and performance –approach goal orientation were found to be significantly positive. Besides, results of the research uncovered that no significant positive link of mastery – avoidance goal orientation with knowledge of cognition, knowledge of regulation, conditional knowledge, monitoring, information management, debugging  and evaluation and also that no significant link of mastery – avoidance goal orientation with knowledge of cognition and declarative knowledge were observed. While performance –avoidance goal orientation correlated significantly and positively with meta cognition, knowledge of cognition, procedural knowledge, conditional knowledge, monitoring and evaluation, it showed significantly negative correlation with knowledge of regulation and information management. Additionally, no significant relationship was discovered among performance avoidance goal orientation, declarative knowledge, procedural knowledge and debugging. The results from multivariate regression analysis proposed that multiple relationships existed between achievement goals (mastery approach, mastery avoidance, performance  approach and performance – avoidance) and meta cognition. Finally, based on the results provided by the present research, achievement goals variables accounted for approximately 17% of meta cognitive variance. Conclusion: Based on these findings, there is a relationship between the achievement goals  with Metacognition and its components. Also explain the significant variance in the achievement goals  of Metacognition.
