IntroductionCitizenship is a concept that refers to different types of human rights in the modern society and gives shape to the interaction between the community and the individual. Efforts for the development and maintenance of citizenship rights still have retained their fundamental importance. These rights prepare the ground for discussion and dialogue about lifestyle. Citizenship rights form the basis of the civil society as an integral part since they prepare the ground for voluntary participation in all social spheres. Therefore, the transition from traditional societies to modern societies has caused changes in the consumption patterns of individuals in areas such as clothing, makeup, nutrition, leisure, cultural consumption, and more clearly in the lifestyle of individuals, followed by changes in the realization of citizenship rights at different levels. The objective of this article is to provide a sociological explanation for the relationship between lifestyle and inclination toward citizenship rights.  Materialamp; MethodsThe theoretical framework of this study in based in Giddens’s views. Giddens defines citizenship in relation to individual and structural levels and in line with democracy. For him, the inclination toward citizenship rights is affected by microlevel variables (here, lifestyle) in addition to structural factors. considering that this survey/field study was conducted on university students, the analytical unit of the study consists of individual students. 373 students were sampled by stratified systematic sampling based on the Cochran formula for sample size. Lifestyle has been studied with its dimensions of body management, leisure, artistic taste, and consumerist taste. The inclination toward citizenship rights has been studied with its dimensions of civil, political, and social rights.  Discussion of Results amp; ConclusionsConsidering the results of the Pearson correlation test and descriptive statistics, we conclude that: There is a direct relationship of 0.14% between the two variables of lifestyle and inclination toward civil rights. Also considering the significance level of the test, there is a significant relationship between student lifestyle and inclination toward civil rights such that the inclination toward civil rights is higher in the modern lifestyle than in the traditional lifestyles. There is also a direct relationship of 0.18% between religiosity and women’s inclination toward political rights.  On this basis, the inclination toward political rights is higher in the modern lifestyle than in the traditional lifestyle; there is a direct relationship of 0.22% between the two variables of lifestyle and inclination toward social rights. Thus, the inclination toward social rights is higher in the modern lifestyle than in the traditional lifestyle. There is a direct relationship of 0.27% between consumerist taste and inclination toward citizenship rights, such that students are more inclined to citizenship rights in the modern lifestyle and with a consumerist taste; there is a direct relationship of 0.04 between body management and inclination toward citizenship rights. However, considering a significance level of greater than 0.05, the research hypothesis is rejected and the null hypothesis is confirmed. We conclude that: There is not a significant relationship between body management and inclination toward citizenship rights; there is a direct relationship of 0.14% between the two variables of leisure and inclination toward citizenship rights, such that students who use modern forms of leisure are more inclined toward citizenship rights. In general, it can be concluded that the lifestyle variable has an impact on the inclination toward citizenship rights.
