IntroductionOrganizations are considered as one of  the most important social entities which are play a crucial role  in recognizing the effective factors in enhancing employees’ social responsibilities. Although many researches have been conducted on social responsibility in corporates, the review materials on the leader role in them are very succinct; in addition, the leader role in social responsibility is rarely examined in a field study. Thus, the present research aims to examine the relationship between ethical leadership and social responsibility in corporates. In this study, ethical leadership was considered as independent variable. Ethical leadership is defined as “the demonstration of normatively appropriate conduct through personal actions and interpersonal  relationships, and the promotion of such conduct to followers through twoway communication, reinforcement, and decisionmaking (Brown et al. 2006). Ethical leadership is more than traits such as integrity and more than valuesbased inspirational leadership. It includes an overlooked transactional component that involves using communication and the reward system to guide ethical behavior. On the other hand corporate social responsibility was considered as dependent variable. Corporate social responsibility is concerned with treating the stakeholders of the firm ethically or in a socially responsible manner. Stakeholders exist both within a firm and outside. Consequently, behaving socially responsibly will increase the human development of stakeholders both within and outside the corporation (Hopkins, 1998). Corporate social responsibility is the overall relationship of the corporation with all of its stakeholders. These include customers employees, communities, owners/investors, government, suppliers and competitors. Elements of social responsibility include investment in community outreach, employee relations, creation and maintenance of employment, environmental stewardship and financial performance (Khoury et al. 1999).   Materials and MethodThe research which was applied with regard to objective was conducted in descriptivecorrelational framework. Taking into account the theoretical framework, the aspects of ethical leadership including interpersonal relationship, pattern and  pragmatism were considered as predictive variables while social responsibility was regarded as criterion variable. The population included all staff of five governmental organizations in Sanandaj, among whom 131 applicants were randomly selected. The  data were gathered through the questionnaire of ethical leadership (Salehnia, 2012), and the corporate social responsibility (Ahmadi, 2012). In addition, the reliability of questionnaires were measured via Cronbach’s alpha and reported as 0.92 and 0.84, respectively. Also, the validity of the tools was confirmed by seven experts in the area of organization and management. Moreover, the data were analyzed through Pearson’s Correlation and Multistep Regression.  Discussion of Results amp; ConclusionsThe analyses showed that organizations applied ethical leadership behaviors and principles of social responsibility in an intermediate to high level. In addition, it was revealed that ethical leadership was significantly and positively related to social responsibility (r= 0.824, plt; 0.01). Furthermore, the correlation among three components of ethical leadership (i.e., interpersonal relationship, pattern and pragmatism) and aspects of social responsibility (i.e., economic, social, environmental, ethical outcomes and social responsibility) were reported significant and positive (plt;0.01). Findings, also, showed that pattern and pragmatism could significantly predict the organizational social responsibility. It can be concluded that leaders can positively affect employees provided that leaders preserve ethical issues like honesty, trustworthiness, and respect to staff as human. Therefore, employees would involve in an active manner through cooperating with others as well as making the leader an appropriate ethical ideal. In total, the study recommended that managers promote social responsibility, by talking to subordinates about social values, showing honesty and transparency in dealing with the various stakeholders, adherence to ethical standards, efforts to develop a code of ethics in organizations and encourage staff to adhere to theirs, and considering the good for the various stakeholders, promote social responsibility.
