Introduction
Dry beans (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) or common beans have been characterized as a nearly perfect food because of their high protein, fiber, perebiotic and vitamin B (Lymo et al, 1992; Geil et al., 1994). Dry beans can also be grown in a variety of eco-agricultural regions. As a result, dry beans are used throughout the world representing 50% of the grain legumes consumed as a human food source. Bean forms a good source of income for farm families. In Iran, bean is a major source of food security, readily available and popular food to both the urban and rural population. Of the different dry bean varieties grown in Iran;  &quot;Red, Naz, Goli and Sayad  &quot;account for vast majority in term of production and consumption. Although all the varieties contain similar major components (protein, fat, carbohydrates and minerals), each have unique minor physical, mechanical and biological profiles that can affect their functional food outcomes. Yet, dry bean is understudied with research programs remaining critically underfunded compared to other commodities. Therefore, the objective of this study was to provide physical, mechanical and biological information on Red dry bean as an important crop.

Materials and Methods
The beans were selected and cleaned manually. It was ensured that the seeds were free of dirt, broken and immature once, and other foreign materials. The experiment was carried out for five irrigation methods (sub-surface trickle, surface trickle, sprinkler center pivot, solid set sprinkler and modified surface irrigation) and four water levels of crop water requirement (50%, 75%, 100% and 125%) on yield and physical and mechanical properties of red bean landraces in central of Iran. Experiments were conducted in a randomized complete block design with three replications for one year in Isfahan. In this research parameters such as geometrical diameter, sphericitypercent, angle of repose and grain strength were measured and the effect of experimental treatments on these parameters were investigated.

Results and Discussion 
Physical, mechanical and biological properties of agriculturally, nutritionally and industrially valuated seed materials are important in designing the equipment for harvest, transport, storage, processing, cleaning, hulling and milling. The analysis results showed that increasing the amount of using water, increased the grain volume. Else the irrigation systems showed different effects on kernel parameters. It was notable that none of the treatments of using water and irrigation systems did not affect the grain hardness. With increasing water requirement from 50% to 125%, the volume seeds of bean gradually increased from 647 cubic mm to 790 cubic mm. Most of bean seed volume with 876 cubic mm was achieved with 125% water requirement under sub-surface trickle irrigation system. The most of establishment angle of seed with 23.2 degree and friction coefficient with 0.387 was achieved under sub surface trickle irrigation respectively and the least of them with 20.4 degree and 0.355 was achieved under modified surface irrigation respectively. The results of statistical analysis of biological characteristics showed that only irrigation system had a significant effect on germination of seeds. The maximum percent of germination was 94.7% in modified irrigation system and then sub surface trickle, surface trickle, solid set and center pivot respectively. 

Conclusion 
This study provided basic information on physical, mechanical and biological properties of common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) The current investigation was conducted on dry red bean. Physical, mechanical and biological attributes including geometrical diameter, sphericity percent, angle of repose and grain strength, seed mass, seed size, seed density and seed germination were measured and the effect of experimental treatments on these parameters were also investigated. The results of this study are expected to be useful for plant breeders, consumers and the food industry.

Key words: Biological properties, Deficit irrigation, Irrigation systems, Mechanical properties, Physical properties, Red Bean seed
