Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) remains the most common malignancy among
                            HIV-infected patients. Human herpesvirus type-8 (HHV-8) is regarded as
                            the infectious etiological agent of Kaposi’s sarcoma (KSHV). Diagnostic
                            procedures associated with KSHV are not routinely performed in
                            HIV-infected subjects. The main objective of this study is to obtain
                            information on KSHV epidemiology in Iranian HIV-infected individuals. In
                            the present cross-sectional study, 109 patients with established HIV
                            infection, who visited a governmental and referral center for HIV
                            screening in Tehran (Tehran west health center (TWHC)) between May 2014
                            and July 2015 were enrolled according to the convenience sample
                            strategy. After peripheral blood collection, isolation of plasma and
                            peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) compartments, DNA extraction
                            was performed. KSHV DNA was analyzed by nested polymerase chain reaction
                            (nested PCR) using primers from ORF-26 (virus minor capsid). Among all
                            109 HIV-infected patients, 67 (61.5%) were male, with an age range of 2
                            - 64 years (mean ± standard deviation 35.8 ± 13.3). KSHV DNA was found
                            in PBMC and plasma samples of six (5.5%) and four (3.6%) patients,
                            respectively. This study revealed a considerable prevalence of KSHV DNA,
                            during latent and lytic phases, among HIV-infected patients. Risk
                            factors for KSHV infection acquisition and concurrent. 0+infection with
                            HIV were also evaluated. Diagnosis of KSHV in the group could be helpful
                            for prognosis of Kaposi’s sarcoma and clinical management.
