Abnormal cholesterol homeostasis is associated with the
                            pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disease and cognitive impairment. Our
                            objective was to evaluate changes in the expression of proteins related
                            to cognition and cholesterol homeostasis in the hippocampi of rats as
                            well as behavioral modifications following the administration of a
                            cholesterol-rich diet. In this experimental study, lasting 16 weeks, 20
                            male Wistar rats (aged 8 weeks) were randomly divided into two groups.
                            One group was fed with a normal diet (ND; n = 10) and the second with a
                            high cholesterol diet (HD; n = 10). The expression of the
                            cognition-related proteins N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) and
                            beta-secretase 1 (BACE1) and cholesterol 24-hydroxylase (CYP46A1), the
                            key cholesterol hemostasis protein, were determined by an immunoblotting
                            assay in the hippocampus homogenate. The Morris water maze (MWM) test
                            was used to examine cognitive performance. Plasma lipidic parameters,
                            including total cholesterol (TC), low density lipoprotein cholesterol
                            (LDL-C), high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and triglycerides
                            (TG), as well as brain TC were measured by colorimetric assay. After a
                            high cholesterol diet had been administered for a period of 16 weeks, a
                            significant increase in TC, LDL-C and TG was observed in the HD group in
                            comparison with the ND group (P &lt; 0.05). Neither the mean of
                            brain wet weight nor brain TC showed significant change in the HD versus
                            the ND group (P = 0.114, P = 0.84, respectively). Despite this fixity,
                            differences in the expression of BACE1 and CYP46A1 were significant (P
                            &lt; 0.05) between the two groups, with high levels of BACE1 and
                            CYP46A1 in the HD group compared with the ND group. These biochemical
                            changes were associated with a significant decrease in the time traveled
                            on a platform quadrant in the HD versus the ND group (P &lt; 0.05)
                            during a spatial memory probe test administered at the same time. The
                            findings show that irregularities in cognitive performance as a result
                            of a high cholesterol diet can be partially mediated by distortion in
                            brain cholesterol homeostasis and processing of the amyloid precursor
                            protein (APP).
