Rates of drug-resistant tuberculosis (TB) and TB associated with
                            human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection have increased
                            dramatically, intensifying challenges in TB control. New formulations of
                            TB treatment drugs that control drug release and increase local drug
                            concentrations will have a significant impact on mitigating the toxic
                            side effects and increasing the clinical efficacy of anti-TB drugs. The
                            aim was to observe the sustained release characteristics of rifapentine
                            polylactic acid sustained-release microspheres in vivo and the
                            accumulation of rifapentine in other tissues following paravertebral
                            implantation. This study is a basic animal experimental study that began
                            on July 17, 2014 in the Fifth Affiliated hospital of Xinjiang Medical
                            University. One hundred and eight New Zealand white rabbits (weighing
                            2.8 - 3.0 kg, male and female, China) were randomly divided into three
                            groups of 36 rabbits each. Blood and tissue samples from the liver,
                            lungs, kidneys, vertebrae, and paravertebral muscle were collected at
                            different time points post-surgery. High performance liquid
                            chromatography (HPLC) analysis with a biological internal standard was
                            used to determine the drug concentrations in samples. In group A, no
                            significant differences in rifapentine concentrations in the liver were
                            detected between any two time points (P &gt; 0.05). However, the
                            differences in rifapentine concentrations between day 10 and day 21 were
                            statistically significant (P &lt; 0.05); for days 21, 35, 46, and
                            60, the differences in rifapentine concentrations between two sequential
                            time points were not statistically significant (P &gt; 0.05). In
                            group B, the differences in rifapentine concentration between days 3 and
                            10 in vertebral bone and in paravertebral muscles were statistically
                            significant (P &lt; 0.05). Rifapentine was detected in the vertebral
                            bone tissue in the group C animals. The rifapentine concentrations
                            between two sequential time points were statistically significant (P
                            &lt; 0.05). Rifapentine could not be detected in the paravertebral
                            muscles 46 days after the operation. The differences in rifapentine
                            concentrations between two sequential time points among days 3, 10, 21,
                            and 35 were statistically significant (P &lt; 0.05). After
                            paravertebral implantation of rifapentine polylactic acid
                            sustained-release microspheres, the concentration of rifapentine in
                            local vertebral bone tissues was maintained above the TB minimum
                            inhibitory concentration for up to 60 days with no apparent accumulation
                            of the drug in other tissues.
