One of the most common complications of pregnancy is gestational
                            diabetes mellitus (GDM), which is increasing worldwide. Experimental and
                            epidemiological studies have shown that higher intake of n-3 long-chain
                            polyunsaturated fatty acids may decrease the risk of various diseases
                            such as diabetes. The objective of this study was to assess the effect
                            of fish oil supplementation on the prevention and treatment of GDM. This
                            systematic review was performed by searching several databases,
                            including PubMed, Scopus, Google Scholar, the Cochrane Library,
                            ProQuest, Science Direct SID, Magiran and IranMedex since 1983. The
                            researchers also searched for references in reviewed clinical trial
                            articles in which fish oil supplementation was compared with placebo or
                            no supplementation. Only two published and in-press articles are
                            included in this review. Based on these studies, docosahexaenoic acid
                            (DHA)-enriched ﬁsh oil (800 mg/d) had no effect on prevention of GDM
                            [0.97 (95% CI: 0.74, 1.27)]. Furthermore, omega-3 fatty acid
                            supplementation containing 180 mg of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and 120
                            mg DHA had beneficial effects on insulin resistance in women with GDM
                            (change from baseline: 1.5 ± 7.5 vs ‏3.5 ± 8.5 mIU/mL, P = 0.02) but did
                            not influence fasting plasma glucose, homeostatic model assessment-Beta
                            cell function (HOMA-B), the quantitative insulin sensitivity check index
                            (QUICKI), or lipid profiles (P &gt; 0.05). There is not enough
                            evidence to support or refute the routine use of fish oil supplements
                            during pregnancy for the prevention or treatment of diabetes. It is
                            suggested that further randomized controlled trials be conducted to
                            evaluate the role of fish oil supplementation in pregnancy.
