Introduction: Preceding crops as a source of organic matter are an important source of micronutrient and can play an important role in the soil fertility and the micronutrients cycle of soil. In addition to the role of the organic matter in increasing the concentration of micronutrients in soil solution, attention also should be paid to the role of the kind and the quantity of the root’s exudates that are released in response to the incorporation of different plant residues in the rhizosphere. Present research was conducted with the objective of studying the effect of the kind of preceding crops: Trifolium (Trifolium pretense L), Sofflower (Carthamus tinectirus L), Sorghum (Sorghum bicolor L), Sunflower (Heliantus annus L) and control (fallow) on the chemical forms of copper in the wheat rhizosphere and the bulk soil and Cu uptake by wheat and also investigating the correlation between the fractions of Cu in soil and Cu uptake in wheat.
Materials and Methods: The present research was conducted as split plot in a Randomized Complete Block design (RCBD) with 3 replications and 5 treatments, in field conditions. In the beginning, the preceding crops were cultivated in the experimental plots and after ending growth, preceding crops were harvested. Then the wheat was cultivated in the experimental plots. Finally, after harvesting the wheat, soil samples were collected from the two parts of the root zone (the wheat rhizosphere and the bulk soil). The soil samples were air dried ground and passed through a 2-mm sieve and stored for chemical analysis. Soil pH (in the soil saturation extract) and organic matter (Walkley–Black wet digestion) were measured in standard methods (1). The Total Organic Carbon (TOC) was measured by Analyzer (Primacs SLC TOC Analyzer (CS22), Netherlands). The available Cu in soil was extracted by DTPA and determined using atomic absorption spectroscopy (2). The fractionation of soil Cu was carried out using the MSEP method (3).
Results and Discussion: The results showed that the preceding crops significantly decreased soil pH, also significantly increased the DOC and DTPA-extractable Cu.These changes were higher in the Trifolium preceding treatment in the rhizosphere soil. Also, the preceding crops significantly decreased Carbonate -Cuand Residual-Cu fractions in the wheat rhizosphere compared with the bulk soil. The preceding crops (except Trifolium) significantly increased Oxide-Cu fraction. The soil Oxide- Cu fraction was higher in the rhizosphere in comparison with the bulk soil. The preceding crops increased the Organic-Cu in both the wheat rhizosphere and the bulk soil and it was higher in Trifolium treatment. The preceding crops increased Cu uptake by wheat and Organic-Cu positively correlated with Cu uptake by wheat.
Conclusion: The Organic-Cu fraction increased in the rhizosphere compared with the bulk soil, whereas Oxide- Cu, Carbonate–Cu and Residual-Cu fractions decreased. According to the results, the observed increase in the copper concentration of organic fraction in the rhizosphere was due to the decrease in the copper concentration of carbonate, oxide and residual fractions. In fact, the main process is the transmission of copper from carbonate, oxide and residual fractions to another fraction. Also, the results showed that the root exudates of the preceding crops and wheat affected the different forms of copper in the soil solid phase. Furthermore, the results of copper forms correlation analysis with Cu uptake by wheat showed that the Organic-Cu fraction had more important role in supplying copper was needed for wheat. Therefore, the preceding crops increased the copper concentration of organic fraction in the rhizosphere compared with the bulk soil, and these changes are associated with increasing the amount of copper uptake in wheat.
