Introduction: Early Clinical Exposure has been conceptualized
to orient medical students towards actual clinical scenario and
help them correlate their theoretical knowledge with real life
situations in early years of MBBS courses. In the present study
we explored the outcome of early clinical exposure in the context
of basic science topics (Physiology) in fresh MBBS entrants
and compared their performance with a conventionally taught
control group.
Methods: One hundred fifty voluntary students of 1st year MBBS
(2015-16) batch consisted the sample of this study. They were
divided into two groups through the simple random method (using
computer generated random number table with roll numbers of
the students). They were evaluated by MCQ (Multiple Choice
Question) and OSCE (Objective Structured Clinical Examination)
before and after being taught a basic Physiology topic (respiratory
system) theoretically. The study group underwent clinical
exposure before the post-test while the control group did not.
Performance of the students was compared between the two
groups by unpaired Student’s t-test whereas marks of pre and posttest
within the same group were compared by paired student’s t–
test. Everywhere p < 0.05 was considered to be significant.
Results: The marks of each group in the pre and post-tests
differed significantly (p < 0.05 in each case). Post-test marks
were significantly greater in each group though the level of
improvement was strikingly higher in the study group (p=0.01).
Though there was no significant difference in pre-test marks of
both groups (p=0.73), post-test marks were significantly higher in
the study group (p=0.04). Among the exposed students, majority
(92%) opined that ECE was a better technique being practically
oriented and more interesting while some (8%) found it to be
more time and energy-consuming, suitable for selective portions
of basic science topics.
Conclusion: Early clinical exposure may be an effective technique
to supplement the traditional theoretical teaching and improve the
performance of fresh medical entrants in Physiology. It has better
acceptability by the students and may be considered for inclusion
in the existing pre-clinical curriculum with proper allocation of
time and manpower.
