The methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) strain is
                            now the most commonly reported antibiotic-resistant bacterium in
                            clinical settings. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop novel
                            antibacterial agents to control this pathogen. Bacteriophages are a
                            potential alternative treatment for MRSA infections. The objective of
                            this study was the isolation and characterization of MRSA phages from
                            the sewage at a tertiary pediatric hospital. Two MRSA strains were
                            isolated from patient blood. The isolated strains were confirmed as MRSA
                            through the conventional methods. Phages were then isolated from the
                            sewage at the tertiary pediatric hospital. Lytic activity was determined
                            with a spot test, while the titers of phage lysates were measured using
                            the DLA technique. The morphology was assessed using electron
                            microscopy, and the latent period time and burst size were determined.
                            Electron microscopy showed MRSA phages’ resemblance to members of the
                            family Siphoviridae, serogroups A and F. They exhibited a latent period
                            of 70 minutes and a relatively burst size of 2,400 plaque-forming units
                            (PFU)/infected cell. The titer of the phages was determined to be 3 ×
                            109 PFU/mL using the by DLA technique. In this study, two phages from
                            the family Siphoviridae were isolated and characterized from sewage at a
                            tertiary pediatric hospital; these phages specifically target MRSA.
                            Their presence may be one reason for the transfer of antibiotic
                            resistance or virulence factors, resulting in transduction and the
                            conversion of nonvirulent strains of Staphylococcus to virulent strains.
                            Considering that phages through can be transferred to wards in an
                            air-born manner, it is better to create negative pressure in the sewage
                            pipes at hospitals until the phages can no longer transfer to the wards
                            via aerosols.
