
Objective Political behavior in organizations is influenced by the differences in perceptions and attitudes of the staff, nature of the action, or people's perception of reality. Such behavior stems from the perception and reaction to self-interest. Different studies have showed that this behavior is an inevitable part of any human activity. Staff when asked about political behavior in the workplace, Often it related to serve their behaviors and to consider as a phenomenon dirty that the personal goals at the expense of other researchers. Such behavior may be harmful to the objectives of the organization and can be considered as a threat to the organizational effectiveness and organizational performance. If employees feel good he has deceived organizational policies, Possible show negative reactions such as annoyance, frustration, anxiety and movement. Most researchers have argued the perception of policy of stressful and harmful and potential negative effects on a wide range of business and personal consequences. Although policies may be both positive as well as negative perceptions, due to the strength of contagion in the organization venice extremely negative consequences resulting from negative policies The present study was conducted to survey the relationship of perception of organizational politics with turnover intentions, job performance, and organization citizenship behavior considering the mediating role of organizational justice.
Methods & Materials This descriptive-analytic study consisted of a sample of 200 employees of the welfare organization and its assemblies in West Azarbaijan. Data were collected using standard questionnaires of Kacmar and Carlson&rsquo;s Perception of Organizational Politics, Niehoff and Moorman&rsquo;s Organizational Justice, Miller, Katerberg and Hulin&rsquo;s Turnover Intentions, Williams and Anderson&rsquo;s Job Performance, and Podsakoff et al.&rsquo;s Organization Citizenship Behavior. Structural Equation Modeling was applied to evaluate the relationships between latent and measured variables in a conceptual model.
Results The results showed that the politic variables had a negative significant correlation with organizational justice (r=&minus;0.37), job performance (r=&minus;0.14), and organization citizenship behavior (r=&minus;0.27). A significant positive correlation was observed between politic variables and turnover (r=&minus;0.45). A significant positive correlation was also observed between justice and job performance and organizational citizenship behavior (r=0/12, r=0.11, p<0.01), whereas a negative significant correlation was evident with turnover intentions. The rate of pairwise correlation fluctuated from 0.11 to 0.45.
Conclusion We concluded that any increase in the perception of organizational politics is accompanied by an increase in the staffs&rsquo; turnover intention and a decrease in justice, job performance, and organizational citizenship behavior.


