Objective: Most people experience bone damage and bone disorders during their lifetimes.
The use of autografts is a suitable way for injury recovery and healing. Mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) are key players in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. Their proliferation
potential and multipotent differentiation ability enable MSCs to be considered as appropriate
cells for therapy and clinical applications. Differentiation of stem cells depends on
their microenvironment and biophysical stimulations. The aim of this study is to analyze the
effects of an electromagnetic field on osteogenic differentiation of stem cells.
Materials and Methods: In this experimental animal study, we assessed the effects of the
essential parameters of a pulsatile electromagnetic field on osteogenic differentiation. The
main purpose was to identify an optimum electromagnetic field for osteogenesis induction.
After isolating MSCs from male Wistar rats, passage-3 (P3) cells were exposed to an
electromagnetic field that had an intensity of 0.2 millitesla (mT) and frequency of 15 Hz for
10 days. Flow cytometry analysis confirmed the mesenchymal identity of the isolated cells.
Pulsatile electromagnetic field-stimulated cells were examined by immunocytochemistry
and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Results: Electromagnetic field stimulation alone motivated the expression of osteogenic
genes. This stimulation was more effective when combined with osteogenic differentiation
medium 6 hours per day for 10 days. For the in vivo study, an incision was made in the
cranium of each animal, after which we implanted a collagen scaffold seeded with stimulated
cells into the animals. Histological analysis revealed bone formation after 10 weeks
of implantation.
Conclusion: We have shown that the combined use of chemical factors and an electromagnetic
field was more effective for inducing osteogenesis. These elements have synergistic
effects and are beneficial for bone tissue engineering applications.
