Orissa State, a meteorological subdivision of India, lies on the east coast of India close to
north Bay of Bengal and to the south of the normal position of the monsoon trough. The monsoon
disturbances such as depressions and cyclonic storms mostly develop to the north of 15  N over the Bay of
Bengal and move along the monsoon trough. As Orissa lies in the southwest sector of such disturbances, it
experiences very heavy rainfall due to the interaction of these systems with mesoscale convection sometimes
leading to flood. The orography due to the Eastern Ghat and other hill peaks in Orissa and environs play a
significant role in this interaction. The objective of this study is to develop an objective statistical model to
predict the occurrence and quantity of precipitation during the next 24 hours over specific locations of
Orissa, due to monsoon disturbances over north Bay and adjoining west central Bay of Bengal based on
observations to up 0300 UTC of the day. A probability of precipitation (PoP) model has been developed by
applying forward stepwise regression with available surface and upper air meteorological parameters
observed in and around Orissa in association with monsoon disturbances during the summer monsoon
season (June-September). The PoP forecast has been converted into the deterministic occurrence/nonoccurrence
of precipitation forecast using the critical value of PoP. The parameters selected through
stepwise regression have been considered to develop quantitative precipitation forecast (QPF) model using
multiple discriminant analysis (MDA) for categorical prediction of precipitation in different ranges such as
0.1–10, 11–25, 26–50, 51–100 and >100mmif the occurrence of precipitation is predicted by PoP model. All
the above models have been developed based on data of summer monsoon seasons of 1980–1994, and data
during 1995–1998 have been used for testing the skill of the models.Considering six representative stations
for six homogeneous regions in Orissa, the PoP model performs very well with percentages of correct
forecast for occurrence/non-occurrence of precipitation being about 96% and 88%, respectively for
developmental and independent data. The skill of the QPF model, though relatively less, is reasonable for
lower ranges of precipitation. The skill of the model is limited for higher ranges of precipitation.
