The identification of the model discrepancy and skill is crucial when a forecast is issued. The
characterization of the model errors for different cumulus parameterization schemes (CPSs) provides more
confidence on the model outputs and qualifies which CPSs are to be used for better forecasts. Cases of
good/bad skill scores can be isolated and clustered into weather systems to identify the atmospheric
structures that cause difficulties to the forecasts. The objective of this work is to study the sensitivity of
weather forecast, produced using the PSU-NCARMesoscale Model version 5 (MM5) during the launch of
an Indian satellite on 5th May, 2005, to the way in which convective processes are parameterized in the
model. The real-time MM5 simulations were made for providing the weather conditions near the launch
station Sriharikota (SHAR). A total of 10 simulations (each of 48 h) for the period 25th April to 04th May,
2005 over the Indian region and surrounding oceans were made using different CPSs. The 24 h and 48 h
model predicted wind, temperature and moisture fields for different CPSs, namely the Kuo, Grell, Kain-
Fritsch and Betts-Miller, are statistically evaluated by calculating parameters such as mean bias, rootmean-
squares error (RMSE), and correlation coefficients by comparison with radiosonde observation. The
performance of the different CPSs, in simulating the area of rainfall is evaluated by calculating bias scores
(BSs) and equitable threat scores (ETSs). In order to compute BSs and ETSs the model predicted rainfall is
compared with Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) observed rainfall. It was observed that
model simulated wind and temperature fields by all the CPSs are in reasonable agreement with that of
radiosonde observation. The RMSE of wind speed, temperature and relative humidity do not show
significant differences among the four CPSs. Temperature and relative humidity were overestimated by all
the CPSs, while wind speed is underestimated, except in the upper levels. The model predicted moisture
fields by all CPSs show substantial disagreement when compared with observation. Grell scheme
outperforms the other CPSs in simulating wind speed, temperature and relative humidity, particularly in
the upper levels, which implies that representing entrainment/detrainment in the cloud column may not
necessarily be a beneficial assumption in tropical atmospheres. It is observed that MM5 overestimates the
area of light precipitation, while the area of heavy precipitation is underestimated. The least predictive skill
shown by Kuo for light and moderate precipitation asserts that this scheme is more suitable for larger grid
scale (>30 km). In the predictive skill for the area of light precipitation the Betts-Miller scheme has a clear
edge over the other CPSs. The evaluation of the MM5 model for different CPSs conducted during this
study is only for a particular synoptic situation. More detailed studies however, are required to assess the
forecast skill of the CPSs for different synoptic situations.
