Background and Objectives: Planning and management of water resource and river basins needs use of conceptual hydrologic models which play a significant role in predicting basins response to different climatic and meteorological processes. Evaluating watershed response through mathematical hydrologic models requires finding a set of parameter values of the model which provides the best fit between observed and estimated hydrographs in a procedure called calibration. As manual calibration is tedious, time consuming and requires personal experiences, automatic calibration methods, make application of CRR models more significant which are based on using a systematic search procedure to find good parameter sets in terms of at least on objective function. Due to the time consuming manual calibration data, especially in low and high parameters automatic calibration methods based on the use of systematic search methods in multi-dimensional space using an objective function is very useful.
Materials and Methods: In this research, the conceptual HEC-HMS model is integrated with the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm. The HEC-HMS model was developed as a replacement for HEC-1, which has long been considered a standard model for hydrologic simulation. Most of the hydrologic models employed in HEC-HMS are event-based models simulating a single storm requiring the specification of all conditions at the start of the simulation. The soil moisture accounting model in the HEC-HMS is the only continuous model simulates both wet and dry weather behaviour. Programming of PSO algorithm was done by MATLAB. Model calibration was performed using the objective function NASH and RMSE resulting parameters were used to those achieve. To evaluate the ability of the PSO algorithm to achieve the optimal solution, a single calibration approach results occurred with semi-automatic calibration results based on Nelder & Mead search algorithm in HEC-HMS PBIAS and RMSE were compared by functions that PSO algorithm represents the connection to a hydrological model. The integrated model is tested on dam basin Kardeh located in Khorasan Razavi province. 
Results: The results show that both the objective function values obtained in the semi-automatic model is considerably higher than the model introduced. Also simulated hydrographs obtained from PSO-HMS model is much better. Finally, those parameters were determined from single approach occurred in the event verification.
Conclusion: The results showed that the method according to the solution of the calibration problem of Ghyrmnfrd an inverse problem can be effective in limiting the number of candidate solutions.

