Background and Objectives: In the recent decades, increase of greenhouse gases and global warming have led to disrupt the earth’s climate system balance which caused extensive climate changes in most regions of the earth. Increase of the earth average temperature and its variations is an index of climate change which is considered in all of climate change theories. The relationship between earth average temperature and other climatic variables is the subject of the present study. Therefore, the main objective of this study is trend analysis of minimum, average and maximum temperature, precipitation and river flow in Armand watershed and investigating its relationship with climate change. 
Materials and Methods: In this study, we tried to investigate the relationship between temporal variation of hydrological parameters and climate change by using modified Mann-Kendall, ADF, KPSS and DFGLS tests. For this purpose, the precipitation and temperature (maximum, minimum and average) data measured at Shahrekord synoptic station and Armand hydrometric station during the period of 1360-1390 were used.
Results: In this study, the relationship between temporal variation of hydrological parameters and climate change was investigated using stationary and trend analysis. For this purpose, the precipitation and temperature (maximum, minimum and average) data of Shahrekord synoptic station and hydrometric data of Armand watershed in the period of 1971-2011 were used. Results showed that the minimum temperature of May, August, June and spring season had a significant decreasing trend. Also, a significant increasing trend was observed in the maximum temperature of September, March and autumn season time series. The average temperature of March has significant increasing trend. In the case of precipitation, the March and winter season experienced a decreasing significant trend. The stream flow time series of Armand River showed a strong decreasing trend and experienced a decline equal to 51.57 (m3/s)in the three past decades. In the hydrological point of view, the main reason is the increasing trend in maximum temperature of the autumn season and reduction of precipitation in winter season (the season with maximum precipitation). In order to evaluate the effect of trend on the stream flow of Armand River that is a reason of existence of climate change in this watershed, three stationary tests including ADF, DFGLS and KPSS were used. The stream flow time series were tested in Normal and standard forms. The results confirmed stationary in stream flow of Armand River at a 95% confidence level that indicates existence of variations in average and variance of stream flow time series. 
Conclusion: The results showed that the existence of trend in precipitation and temperature time series had significant effects on hydrological behavior of the watershed and it caused river flow reduction and non-stationarity. In other words, the Armand watershed may face with the climate change and it should be considered in water resources planning and management such as water conveyance and extending of croplands.  

