Background and Objective: Many researches have been done on the topic of frequency identification of historical Lake Urmia water level based on salt zones. In addition, some relationships between periodic behaviors of Lake Urmia water level and climate indices and sunspots were reported. Regarding the severe decrease in Lake Urmia water level during recent years, the need of accurate forecast of Lake Urmia water level is felt more than ever. The main objective of this study is to identify and forecast the Lake Urmia water level fluctuations using time series analysis.
Material and Methods: The case study is Lake Urmia which is placed in the northwestern part of Iran. Monthly time series of Lake Urmia water level during 1966 to 2008 were studied. The time series was chronologically divided into parameter identification and testing datasets. The first 82 percent of the time series was considered as parameter identification dataset and the 18 percent of the rest of the time series was opted as testing dataset. Trend, identification of significant frequencies and stationarity were identified using Mann-Kendall and modified KPSS test with Fourier analysis. Residue of time series after de-trending and periodicity removal was transformed to normal distribution using Johnson transformation. Transformed time series was modeled by ARMA models and adequacy of selected model was tested using Portmanteau test. Then the model was used to forecast Lake Urmia water level. 
Results: Mann-Kendall statistics was -4.857 which is way greater than its critical value at 1 percent significance level. It means that there is a significant decreasing trend in monthly Lake Urmia water level time series. Results of frequency analysis revealed that there are monthly, 3 year, 4 year, 20 year, 35 year and 47 year significant frequency in the studied time series. Removing these frequencies had led to a stationary time series. Regarding to Akaike information criteria, AR(13) model was selected and the model had passed the Portmanteau adequacy test with calculated statistics equal to 116.323. Forecasts results show that annual Lake Urmia water level during 2009 to 2016 will be equal to 1272.17, 1272.11, 1271.34, 1270.55, 1270.31, 1270.12 and 1270.13 meter, respectively. 
Conclusion: In this study the modified KPSS test with Fourier analysis performed because U shaped figures were observed in the Lake Urmia water level time series. The modified KPSS test with Fourier analysis is a specified test to test stationarity and significance of frequencies in the presence of an unknown number of smooth structural breaks. This test has never been used in water science. The results showed that the proposed method which is consisted of the modified KPSS test with Fourier analysis and linear time series modeling has the ability to model Lake Urmia water level time series as the calculated RMSE for testing dataset is equal to 0.1 meter. The results of forecast indicates that Lake Urmia water level will approximately stays still until the middle of year 2010 then it will decrease rapidly until 2013 and finally it will become steady until 2016. After 2016 slightly increasing trend will be occur. The increasing trend beyond 2016 is a consequence of applying over-year long-run frequencies. Due to the duration of recorded historical time series of Lake Urmia water level, predictability and resiliency of over-year long-run frequencies are unknown so forecasts beyond the year 2016 might suffer from lake of reliability.  

