Background and Objectives: Drip irrigation is one of the efficient methods widely used in the agriculture sectore of Iran in recent years. The use of low quality water creates problems in these systems. Physical clogging of emitters is the most important of these problems. Emitters clogging reduce irrigation efficiency and life time of drip irrigation system. Entry of suspended and physical particles into the emitter is the most important factor in emitters clogging and reducing the discharge rate of them. On the other hand, various factors such as water temperature affect the discharge rate and clogging of emitters. The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of temperature on the anti-clogging performance of the long path emitters. 
Materials and Methods: In order to study the effect of temperature on the physical clogging of the long path emitters, by constructing an experimental physical model and the use of sand particles with different sizes and concentrations, the anti-clogging performance of seamed and seamless irrigation tapes and emitting pipe was studied at temperatures of 13, 23, 33 and 43 °C and eight phases. Statistical indices of the average discharge, clogging rate and uniformity coefficient was used to assess the clogging performance of emitters at different phases. 
Results: The results shows that due to increased emitter clogging from Phase 1 to Phase 8, the average emitter discharge decrease and the clogging rate has been increased. The amount of discharge reduction in emitting pipe was less than Tapes, also, the emitter clogging decreased with increasing water temperature. Uniformity coefficient of emitting pipe and seamed irrigation tape in all test stage was more than 92 and 90 percent, respectively, thus they have excellent uniformity coefficient. The uniformity coefficient of seamless Tape drip irrigation was more than 60 percent in all test stages. 
Conclusion: The results show that raising the temperature has a positive effect on reducing of the clogging emitters. The results also showed that the emitting pipe and seamed irrigation tape have the minimum and maximum clogging rate, respectively. Also, the uniformity coefficient of emitting pipe and seamless irrigation tape was greater than 90 percent in all circumstances. Statistical analysis showed that the effect of temperature on the clogging rate of emitters is significant at Statistical level of one percent.  

