Background and Objectives: Evapotranspiration is one of the parameters that have special importance in various areas of agriculture and water resources management also for definition of future policies its estimation is required. The main objective of this research is to determine mathematical models for estimating evapotranspiration and studying assessment of Genetic programming in estimating evapotranspiration. 
Materials and Methods: In this study, using the Penman-Monteith method, the reference evapotranspiration / month was calculated based on meteorological data such as average temperature, relative humidity, sunny hours, wind speed and precipitation amount for a period of 40 years (1345 to 1391) in the stations of Zabol, Iranshahr, Chabahar and Zahedan and 16 separate lag time patterns were arranged. Then, the monthly evapotranspiration rates were modeled using GeneXproTools software to develop and implement the models based on genetic programming. 80% of data were used in the education to develop the models and the remaining 20% were used in the test to verify the models and evaluate their accuracy. Finally, the coefficients of determination (R2) and root mean square error (RMSE) were used to analyze and verify the accuracy of the model and compare it with Penman-Monteith method. 
Results: Based on the statistical coefficients of determination and root mean square error, it was found that due to low memory, the model or an independent variable, in all stations and models provided based on patterns 1, 2 and 3, there is little accuracy in prediction of the evapotranspiration value. The best models obtained for the stations of Zahedan, Zabol, Iranshahr and Chabahar were respectively in the patterns of 13, 10, 12 and 13. Moreover, the best model for Zabol station was obtained with an error of 1.03 mm in day and its coefficient of determination was 0.96. 
Conclusion: The results indicate that all acceptable models for this study were obtained in more than 10 patterns. Moreover, Genetic programming is an optimal method for modeling the monthly- series evapotranspiration. 

