Background and Objectives: Aquifer systems are often characterized by non-stationary and nonlinear features. Modelling of these systems and forecasting their future conditions requires identification of these fundamental features. Conceptual or physically based models are often the main type of model used to understand physical processes occurring in a particular system. However, they have a number of practical limitations, including the need for large amounts of hydrogeological data. Recently, wavelet analysis has been used widely in hydrological time series forecasting owing to its ability to decode aforementioned features. The objective of this study is to assess the ability of combined wavelet-artificial neural network model to predict the groundwater level.  
Materials and Methods: In this paper, a hybrid model is tested based on coupling wavelet and artificial neural networks (WANN) that use sum of sub-series method, for its ability to yield forecasts of groundwater level. The model results are compared with the results from artificial neural networks (ANN) and multi linear regression (MLR) models. The variables used to develop the models were monthly groundwater level at two piezometers and monthly total precipitation data recorded for 20 years in the Qom plain, Iran. 
Results: Twelve-month-ahead prediction with the WANN model show that the error of this model is 30 and 23 percent less than ANN model and 37 and 51 percent less than MLR model for piezometers 1 and 2 respectively. The results show that precipitation has no significant effect on groundwater level variations of the two study piezometers; although for the detail sub-series, use of precipitation improved the results.  
Conclusion: The results showed that WANN model simulate the non-linear and non-stationary characteristics of groundwater level better than ANN and MLR models. Using rainfall time series did not improve the ANN results, because the groundwater level is very deep in Qom plain.   

