Background and Objectives: Studying the behavior of river flows is one of the basic requirements in water resources planning. The identification of river flow processes at different temporal scales, using chaos theory is important for river flow prediction and selecting the proper model framework. River flow has dynamic and nonlinear nature. Phase space is defined as the space which includes all the possible conditions which describe a system, in dynamic systems. Because of the inaccessibility of exact mathematical equations of system, it is difficult to clearly identify the phase space; moreover all the available information is a scalar time series. Therefore, the embedding method with exerting delay times on river flow time series, is used in order to reconstruct the phase space. The objective of current research is to evaluate the effects of temporal scales and time series fluctuations on chaotic analysis, including phase space reconstruction and chaotic behavior of time series. 
Materials and Methods: The study site is Nazloo chai sub basin, which is located in the Urmia lake basin (west of the Lake). The watershed area is about 2917.1 km2 and the average height of region is 1720 m. the slope of the river is 0.3%. There is no storage dam on the river. The runoff data of Nazloo chai river was obtained from Tapic hydrometric station in daily, weekly and monthly scales, from 1990 up to 2011 statistical period. The reconstruction of phase space was performed in three different temporal scales (daily, weekly and monthly), in order to determine the dynamic behavior of the system and the regularity pattern of the river flow. For this purpose, delay time was calculated using AMI (Average Mutual Information) method. Moreover the proper embedding dimension was calculated using FNN (False Nearest Neighbors) method. Chaotic behavior of river flow for daily, weekly and monthly scales was evaluated by using correlation dimension and Hurst exponent methods. 
Results: In this study the daily, weekly and monthly observed discharges data of Nazloo chai River have been used to reconstruct the phase space from 1990 to 2011. Delay time was calculated by AMI method and it is 39 for daily, 18 for weekly and 9 for monthly scale. Embedding dimension as a minimum dimension for reconstruction of phase space to describe the dynamic system was calculated using FNN method for daily, weekly and monthly scales and were 26, 8 and 4 respectively. Chaotic behavior of river flow for daily, weekly and monthly scales was evaluated by using correlation dimension and Hurst exponent methods. Correlation dimension was 2.8 for daily, 3.62 for weekly and 5.52 for monthly scale. Hurst exponent for daily, weekly and monthly scales was obtained 0.84, 0.77 and 0.76 respectively. 
Conclusion: The results illustrate the chaotic behavior of the river flow in all studied time scales. 

