According to what the theorists of intertextuality have focused on, no original text has
been existed. The mentioned works like other works have been reflections of the earlier
texts. It seems that the application of intertextuality in the field of architecture criticism
and applying its potentials in architecture, actually the study of a work in connection with
previous ones, can be resulted to a better study and analysis. The absence of this approach
in architecture criticism is obvious. So In this study firstly we describe various aspects
of text and intertextuality and also the theorists of this approach, and then according
to this approach, we criticize and investigate a number of works by Bernard Tschumi.
Afterwards we address the in-between space theory which has been proposed by Bernard
Tschumi. The in-between space in his opinion is a space in which the building already built
and what is to be embedded, will be encountered. It seems that in-between space issues
in architecture was influenced by the intertextuality theory of Kristeva. Analyzing the
similarities between these two concepts (intertextuality and in-between space) is another
objective of this research; in fact we seek to demonstrate the roots of intertextuality in
some architectural theories such as in-between space. This research is a type of logicalreasoning
research which utilizes reasoning to explain the relationships and understand
the components of a subjective system.
The authors sought to answer the questions as follow: 1- How intertextuality can be
considered for an architectural work? 2- What is common between in-between space of
Bernard Tschumi and the theory of intertextuality?
The results of this research indicate that a work of architecture is like a text and in fact
is an intertextuality of its previous and later works. And the use of intertextuality in the
field of architecture criticism is efficient. And also there are roots of intertextuality in
some architectural theories such as in-between space theory.
