Background and Objectives: Due to limited water resources, there is too much emphasis on the efficient use of present water resources and the use of waste water and saline and brackish water for irrigation. Therefore, for having a successful agriculture, it is necessary to the process come under the control of salinity. Magnetized water can be used for reclamation of water and soil. The objective of this study was to investigate the soil moisture and soil salinity around the emitters at different stage of irrigation using magnetized saline water.
Materials and Methods: The treatments including two treatments of irrigation water (magnetized water and non-magnetized water) as main treatments and three level of salinity including well water, saline waters 5 and 10 dS/m were a minor factor. Field experiment was performed as 
split-split plot in randomized complete block with three replications. To investigate the effect of magnetized water on soil salinity, magnets were installed around the pipe and output of water supply. Used magnets were permanent ceramic that changed the structure and physical properties of the fluid with magnetic field with appropriate strength. In order to investigate the effect of magnetized water on the accumulation of salts in the soil, samples were taken at horizontal distance (near the emitter, distance of 25 cm from the emitter and distance of 50 cm from the emitter) and vertical (depths of 0-20, 20-40, 40-60 and 60-80 cm) and soil electrical conductivity were measured. In order to investigate the effect of magnetized water on the accumulation of salts in the soil, samples were taken at horizontal distance (near the emitter, distance of 25 cm from the emitter and distance of 50 cm from the emitter) and vertical (depths of 0-20, 20-40, 40-60 and 
60-80 cm) and soil electrical conductivity were measured. 
Results: The results of the comparison of average soil moisture showed that soil moisture 
at different distances from the emitters of magnetized water treatment was more than 
non-magnetized water and this difference was significant at 5% probability level. Irrigation at all stages, in different locations from the emitter, magnetized water caused increasing of 3-6.5 percent in all three salinity treatment. Also, the results of the comparison of average soil electrical conductivity showed that soil electrical conductivity at magnetized water treatment was less than non-magnetized water and this effect was significant at 5% probability level. Soil electrical conductivity at near the emitter at the beginning of season, had not significant different with soil electrical conductivity at the end of season, but at distances of 25 cm and 
50 cm from the emitter, there was significant different between soil electrical conductivity of the beginning and end of season. Irrigation with magnetized water caused reduction of 
31 percent of soil electrical conductivity than normal irrigation. 
Conclusions: Using magnetized water can be improved the management of water in agricultural and experience deficit irrigation methods. The magnetized irrigation saving water use and solved the soil salinity problem, recommended for use in agriculture. 

