Trees are one of the most commonly used bio-indicators and have
                            been widely applied for heavy metals (HMs) monitoring in the ambient air
                            because of their simple and efficient sampling and examination. The main
                            objective of this study was to evaluate local pine trees for their
                            potential as a bio-indicator of HMs in urban areas. Besides, the
                            distribution pattern of HMs in the study area, meteorological and land
                            use factors affecting this pattern, and HMs source identification were
                            investigated. Forty-eight sampling locations were selected in the Yazd
                            city, capital of Yazd province in Iran, and concentrations of five HMs-
                            iron (Fe), copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), lead (Pb), and cadmium (Cd)- were
                            measured in the leaves of the most abundantly local pine trees, Pinus
                            eldarica, using the atomic absorption spectroscopy method. The obtained
                            data were analyzed for source identification using Spearman’s rank
                            correlation coefficient and principal component analysis (PCA). The
                            ordinary Kriging method was used to obtain a spatial map of HMs
                            distribution in the study area. Iron had the highest concentration
                            (345.0053 mg/kg) in leaves when compared with other HMs. The
                            concentration of Zn, Cu, Pb and Cd were 26.1384, 5.5905, 2.9963 and
                            0.7383 mg/kg, respectively. Spatial mapping indicated that industrial
                            districts and areas with heavy traffic had the highest HMs pollution.
                            Wind direction was recognized to be the most important factor in HMs
                            transportation. Anthropogenic sources were known as the main responsible
                            factor for HMs emission. Pine trees can be used as a worthy
                            bio-indicator for HMs pollution monitoring in the ambient air in areas
                            with extensive vegetation of pine trees.
