Background and Objectives: Optimizing the operation of reservoirs is the most important issue in water science and engineering which has been resolved through a variety of traditional optimization methods. One of these methods is optimizing using the meta-heuristic algorithms. The researchers around the world show the performance of meta-heuristic algorithms performance has been far better than procedures such as linear programming. The aim of this study is to evaluate the performance of imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA) and ant colony algorithm (ACO) with application of chain constraints. 
Materials and Methods: In this research, ICA, is used to solve the optimization problem of reservoirs operation. The approach taken in this research is application of relationship continuity in determining the initial position of countries, which has been proposed as a chain constraints. The results of applying the chain constraints and lack of application of the chain constraints have been compared and consequently these results have been compared with one of well -known algorithm named as ant colony algorithm. 
Results: The results indicated that imperialist competitive algorithm without considering the continuity equation, was rarely able to find possible answer and applying the chain constraints to determine the initial position of countries, enhanced the performance of algorithm more efficiently and it leads to even better performance compared to ant colony algorithm and find an appropriate value for the objective function, so that after running ten times, the mean 
for objective function for imperialist competitive algorithm was 15.822 and for ant colony algorithm was 48.008. 
Conclusion: Result have shown with chain constraints the ICA and ACO algorithms have been unable to find feasible solution and their performance is fairly high. Therefore the chain constraints can be applied as an essential element in enhancing the efficiency of these algorithms. Also the results of the comparison between the algorithms has shown that ICA algorithm performance has been far better than ACO algorithm. 

