Background and Objectives: Rice is one of the oldest cultivated plants in the world and plays a significant role in feeding the people in world as in Iran. One of the soil management approaches in improving the low native soil fertility of soils is the application of municipal solid waste compost and biochar. As, the application of these two amendments in Iranian calcareous soil is not yet studied, the main objective of this research is to test the performance of concurrent application of biochar and compost in paddy field on rice leaves nutrient. 
Materials and Methods: The effects of different application rates of municipal solid waste compost (MSWC) and biochars derived from rice straw (RSB) and biochars derived from sugarcane bagasse (SBB) at 350 °C on the nutrients concentration (N, P, K, Cu, Zn, Fe and Mn) of rice leaves was investigated in a greenhouse experiment. The MSWC at four levels (0, 10, 20 and 30 g per kg soil) and biochars at three levels (0, 3 and 6 g biochars per kg soil) were incorporated to the soil. The experiment was conducted as factorial arrangement based on randomized complete block design with three replications. 
Results: The highest amount of nitrogen (4.05%) was observed in the treatment of 
6 gr RSB + 30 gr MSWC per kg soil, while the minimum amount of nitrogen was obtained in the control treatment. The P concentration in 6 gr SSB + 30 gr MSWC per kg soil treatment was two times more than P in the control treatment. The P concentration of leaves increased with increasing the MSWC application in all applied biochar levels. The maximum and minimum concentrations of K were observed in the 6 gr RSB + 30 gr MSWC per kg soil treatment and control treatment, respectively. The maximum concentration of Cu was observed in the treatment of 6 gr RSB per kg soil. The maximum concentration of Zn (27.49 mg kg-1 plant) was observed in the treatment of 20 gr MSWC + 3 gr RSB per kg soil. The Fe concentration of rice leaves increased with increasing the biochar application in all applied MSWC levels. There was also maximum manganese in the treatment of 6 gr RSB per kg soil. 
Conclusion: Overall, this study showed that the co-application of MSWC and biochar 
(RSB and SBB) has a great impact on improvement of the rice leaves nutrients in the paddy calcareous soils.

