Background and Objectives: Zinc (Zn) is one of the most important essential nutrients that plants require it for their physiological and generation functions.The low bioavailability of Zn is in calcareous and saline soil, therefore the study of chemical forms and bioavailability of Zn in these soils is necessary to estimate the potential availability. The objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of plant growth promoting rhizobacteria and mycorrhizae fungi inoculation on the chemical forms of Zn in a calcareous soil at different salinity levels after harvesting corn by a sequential extraction method.
Materials and Methods: In order to do this study, apporpirate amount of surface soil (0-30 cm) that had low organic matter and electerical conductivity, was collected and then, selected physicochemical properties of soil were measured by laboratory standard methods. A factorial experiment as a completely random design with three replications was conducted in greenhouse conditions. The first factor consisted of three salinity levels (0, 15 and 30 Meq salt kg-1 soil) and the second factor was microbial inoculation (without inoculation, Glumus Intraradices, Pesudomonas bacteria and fungi + bacteria). After applying treatments, corn seeds (Zea mays L.) were planted in plastic pots and held for 10 weeks. Sequential extraction procedure of Sing et al. (1988) was used to measure chemical forms of Zn in soil after corn harvesting. The 
Zn was separated into 7 fractions by this method that include WsEx-Zn, Car-Zn, Om-Zn, MnOx-Zn, AFeOx-Zn, CFeOx-Zn and Res-Zn. 
Results: The results showed that increasing salinity levels increased the concentrations of soluble+exchangeable, carbonatic and manganese oxide fractions and the concentrations of residual and organic fractions decreased. By application of all microbial treatments, the concentration of soluble + exchangeable, carbonatic and manganese oxide fractions increased and the concentration of residual fraction declined. The higher increase of concentrations of soluble + exchangeable (101%), carbonatic (59.3%) and manganese oxide (100%) fractions were observed in co-inoculation of bacteria and fungi treatment. There were positive and significant correlation between soluble+exchangeable, carbonatic and manganese oxide fractions with DTPA extractable Zn which indicates the role of these fractions in the supply of Zn to plant. 
Conclusion: Results showed that the biological treatments caused the redistribution of Zn from low available fractions to high available fractions in soil. Also, increasing soil salinity levels caused the redistribution of Zn from insoluble fractions to more soluble fractions and therefore, the mobility of Zn in soil increased. 

