Dhyary of new institutions in rural development in the last decades has created the Office of Management and Rural Development. If the development is done based on the needs of the people, would be more appropriate and correct that the local level is done by Dhyary. However Dhyary as government representative in the villages and local people and institutions play an important role in resolving the problems of the rural population . The purpose of this study in rural district of northern Astarābād of Gorgancitywas to examine the influence of dhyaran&#039;s partnership &amp; operation in the social development &amp; Skeletal of villages To achieve this objective, descriptive  analytical study is used. The study population consisted of four villages with active Dhyary in the district with 595 Family on the basis of the Cochran formula, 210 samples were selected. Research tool,was a questionnaire that its validity was confirmed by the group of experts and for determining the reliability measure of Cronbach&#039;s alpha coefficient of the questionnaire (86/0) was used. Data were analyzed using spss software. In analyzing the data to examine the relationship between the significant Dhyary&#039;s operation and social and cultural development &amp; physical rurals was used singlesample ttest and ttest voice. And to determine the level of development rurals in the fields of social and physical before and after Partnership &amp; Operation of dhyaran  the Friedman test was used. The results of study show the level of development rurals in the fields of social and physical after Partnership &amp; Operation of dhyaran is over. In both indicators, as well as social and physicalbiological ‌ environment, rural development, with the participation of Dhyary has significant relation at the level of 99 percent. The indicators of physical  biological ‌ environment after Partnership of  dhyaranappropriated averaging  5/12 the highest rated at the Development of  Partnership &amp; Operation dhyaran.
