Objective: Poly [2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphoryl choline (MPC)-co-n-buthyl methacrylate
(BMA)-co-p-nitrophenyl-oxycrabonyl poly ethylene glycol-methacrylate (MEONP)]
(PMBN), a biocompatible terpolymer, is a unique polymer with applications that
range from drug delivery systems (DDS) to scaffolds and biomedical devices. In this research,
we have prepared a monomer of p-nitrophenyl-oxycarbonyl poly (ethylene glycol)
methacrylate (MEONP) to synthesize this polymer. Next, we designed and prepared a
smart, water soluble, amphiphilic PMBN polymer composed of MPC, BMA, and MEONP.
Materials and Methods: In this experimental study, we dissolved MPC (4 mmol, 40%
mole fraction), BMA (5 mmol, 50% mole fraction), and MEONP (1 mmol, 10% mole fraction)
in 20 ml of dry ethanol in two necked flasks equipped with inlet-outlet gas. The structural
characteristics of the synthesized monomer and polymer were determined by Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), proton nuclear magnetic resonance (H-NMR),
dynamic light scattering (DLS), gel permeation chromatography (GPC), scanning electron
microscope (SEM), and transmission electron microscope (TEM) analyses for the first
time. We treated the polymer with two different cell lines to determine its biocompatibility.
Results: FT-IR and H-NMR analyses confirmed the synthesis of the polymer. The size of
polymer was approximately 40 nm with a molecular weight (MW) of 52 kDa, which would
be excellent for a nano carrier. Microscopic analyses showed that the polymer was rodshaped.
This polymer had no toxicity for individual cells.
Conclusion: We report here, for the first time, the full properties of the PMBN polymer.
The approximately 40 nm size with an acceptable zeta potential range of -8.47, PDI of 0.1,
and rod-shaped structure indicated adequate parameters of a nanopolymer for nano bioapplications.
We used this polymer to design a new smart nano carrier to treat leukemia
stem cells based on a target DDS as a type of bio-application.
