Objective: The properties of self-renewal and division in spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs)
support spermatogenesis. There is a number of reported methods for in vitro SSC culture
systems. The development of a culture system that effectively supports isolation and selfrenewal
of germline stem cells (GSCs) is of tremendous benefit for clinical trials, experimental
research, and as potential treatment for male infertility. The current study aims to consider the
cultivation and behavior of GSCs in a non-adherent culture system.
Materials and Methods: In this experimental study, we cultured testicular cells from neonatal
mice in agarose coated plates in the presence of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM) medium (CTRL group), 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)+DMEM (10% group), and
growth factor (G group) that contained 2% FBS, glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF),
epidermal growth factor (EGF), and fibroblast growth factor (FGF). Mouse spermatogonial
stem-like colonies were isolated approximately 3 weeks after digestion of the testis tissue.
After passages 2-3, the identity of the mouse spermatogonial stem-like cells was confirmed
by immunocytochemistry, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and
flow cytometry against the germ cell markers ?6, B1, c-Kit, Thy-1, c-Ret, Plzf, and Oct4. The
statistical significance between mean values in different groups was determined by one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Results: We observed spermatogonial stem-like colonies in the G and 10% groups, but
not the CTRL group. Immunocytochemistry, flow cytometry, and RT-PCR confirmed expressions
of germ cell markers in these cells. In the spermatogonial stem-like cells, we
observed a significant expression (P < 0.05) of germ cell markers in the G and 10% groups
versus the testis cells (T). Their proliferative and apoptotic activities were examined by
Ki67 and PI/annexin V-FITC. Alkaline phosphatase assay showed that mouse spermatogonial
stem-like colonies were partially positive.
Conclusion: A non-adherent culture system could provide a favorable method for in vitro
short-term culture of spermatogonial stem-like cell colonies.
