Analysis of development strategies for ecotourism promenade around the city using a combined approach of SWOT-ANP (Case study: Valley of Kong)  Introduction:  New data of the technological speed causes the formation of social developments and emerging from the leisure as one of the fundamental requirements. This applies to the development of the tourism industry and tourism destination of around urban as a promenade in the following scale is used; therefore, the Valley of the Kong with respect to the diversity and the richness of its natural and cultural city of Mashhad can attract attention and tourists.  Methodology: In this study of compilation approach, the most appropriate strategy for the SWOT-ANP to determine the development of ecotourism in the Valley of the Kong. Since the analysis model of inner factors of SWOT (strengths and weaknesses) and external (opportunities and threats) and classified its results often list only listing of the inner and outer factors, and therefore cannot fully assess comprehensive strategic decision making process. Discussion: Hence this research, SWOT model to fix shortcomings of the technique of ANP. In fact, the process of analysis of the network between the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats can establish dependency. The present article, in terms of the objective applied methods and terms of their analytical descriptive study-style. Method of data collection for field studies, library and type of work (interviews and questionnaire) and a theoretical framework as well as with the use of the documents is done. Conclusion: Based on the results of the research, the most appropriate strategy for the development of ecotourism in the promenade of the Valley Kong, strategy SO (coordination between the various departments and institutions and the development of ecotourism and resources associated with it and the natural and cultural attractions of tourism and job creation in the Valley of the Kong promenade) with a weight of 0.746. While the strategy WO weighing alternative strategy as 0.494.
