
Joun1al of Mediclna! Plants







The Effect of Hydro-alcoholic Extract of Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra) Rhizome on the Mechanical Activity of the Isolated Colon of Male Rats and its Interaction with Cholinergic System


Ghayedi :"1 (Ph.D.)', Bahaoddini AA (Ph.I!.)', Khoshnam  SE (Ph.nl"


1 Biology Department, Shiraz University, Shiraz.lran
2- Ph)'' > iology Department,  Ahvaz Jundishapur  Univer ity of Medical  Sck:nces, Ahvaz,
Iran
"'Corresponding  author:  Pby iology  Department,   Ahvaz  Jundis-hJpur   University  of Medical Sdcm:e.s, Ahvaz, Iran
Tel: +98-917-1491729. Fox: +98-611-3738248
Email: esmaei l.khoshnam 1392@gm;ti l.tom


Abstract
Background: Glycyrrhiza glabra (Licoriec) has been traditionally used as a medicinal plant in
]ran for treatment of diseases such as gastric ulcer and relieve intestinal spasms.
Objective: In the present study, the effect of  hydro-alcoholic extract of licorice rhizome on mechanical activity of isolated colon of male rats has been studied.
]\i[ethods: In this experimental study, the colon tissue of 10 adult male rats were dissected and separated into two groups: experimental and control. Each group including t!:n strips of tissue. The segments  were  connected to a force transducer longitudinally and  inserted  to  an  organ bathe contained oxygenated Tyrode solution (37 "C, pH=7.4). Their mechanical activit)• were recorded by power lab A[) instrument in basal condition, and  after  administration  of acetylcholine (4Xl0'6M) and Atropine (10-'M) in the t > resence and absence of licorice rhizome extract (0.036 mg/ml). Also, the mechanical activity of control group segmenls were recorded at the same condition with extract solvent (ethanol %70).
Results: A significant decrease in mechanical activity was found after administration of hydro­
alcoholic extract of licorice compared with the control group. Also, a significant decrease of mechanical activity was seen in the presence of extract and acetylcholine  compared  to  the control group. While the mechanical activity of tissue didn't significant changed in the presence of Atropine and extract between  experimental and control groups.
Conclusion: We c•m conclude that hydro-alcoholic extract of licorice has modifying effect on
colon motility, and this activity maybe occurred independent of the cholinergic system.

Keywords: Cholinergic, Colon, Licorice, Mechanical activity




 

