Jouma!    of    Me-Jicinal    Plants	





Ex vitro Production of Transgenic Composite Plants in Glycyrrhiza glabra via Agrohacterium rhizogenes-mediated  Transformation as a New Method

 
Zcbarjadi AR (Ph.0.{2', Safari M (M.Sc.) 1
 
Cheghamirzn K (l'h.0.) 1
 



1- Agronomy and PlatH Breeding Department, Faculty of Agriculture. R::tzi University, Kermanshah, lran
2•-  Biotechnology   for  Drought   Tolerance   Research  Department,  Razi   University,
Kermanshah, lran
'''Corresponding    ttuthor:   Agronomy    anJ    Piant    Breeding    Department,    Faculty    of Agriculture,  Rnzi  University,  Kermanshah,  Irnn
Tel: 98- 83- 3833!726. Fax: +98- 83- 3832!083
Email: ze-barjaJia li@y;thoo.r:otn


Abstract

Background: Licorice, Glycyrrhiza glabra (belong to Lcguminosae family) is one of the most popular  medicinal  plants in the world and it is widely used  in many  fields such as medical, pharmaceutical,  confectionery and health  industries. nifferent parts of licorice (shoots, leaves and roots) were had various components such as Glycyrrhzin that was used for some proposes. Objective: The current study was done with  the  aim  of gene transfer  via  Ar < robacterium rhizogenes by ex vitro method for hairy root production in licorice.
1\lethods: The experiment was laid out as • completely randomized  design (CRO) with five treatments in three  replications.  At first, root of  young  plantlcts was eliminated  and excited
plantlcts were pulled in the glass wool contain suspension of bacteria. After 10 to 14 days of inoculation with Agrobacterium rhizogenes, the roots were appeared. The percentage of root induction by four strains of Agrobacterium (ATCC 15834, GMJ 9534, A4 and A13) with check (without bacteria) was investigated.
Results: The  results  of PCR  analysis  with  specific  primers  for roots  of  composite  plants (putative transgenic) was shown  that three strains of bacteria  (A4, A13 and GMI 9534) and
strain ATCC 15834, were produced  100% and 66.66% transgenic roots respectively.
Conclusion: Thus, production  of composite licorice plants was remarked  due to it has low cost, fast and simple.

Keywords; G{vcyrrhiza glabra, Agrobacterium rhizogenes, Composite plant, Hairy root









 

