
Joumal  of"\ < fed:cinal  P!mlto;;;







Effect ofKombucha Tea on Depression  and Motor Activity in Mice

 
Rabiei Z (:vi.Sc.) 1
 

Mokhtari Sh (M.Sc.)', Babaei F (M.Sc.) 1
 

Ralieian-kopaei M (	Ph.D.)'*
 

1-  rvfcdical   Plants   Research   Center,   Sh < .threkord   lJnlversity   of   Medical   Science, ShahrekonJ, Iran
*Corresponding  aurher:   ledical  Plants  Research  Center,  Shahrekord  University  ol
Medical Science, Shahrekord. Iran
Tel: +98•38•33346692.  Fax:   98•38• 33330709
E-maiL rafieian @yahoo.corn

Abstract

Background:  Depression  is  a  threatening  disease.  Due  to  adverse  effects  of  chemical antidepressant drugs, researcher's attention has been shifted toward natural drug.
Objective: In this work, the antidepressant effect of Kombueha tea (KT) evaluated against reserpine induced depression in mice.
l\fethods: In this experimental study, 42 male mice were randomly divided into 6 groups of 7 mice. Vehicle mice received  normal saline (I  mglkg, i.p.), negative and positive control groups
received  reserpine  (Smg/kg,  i.p.)  and  nuoxetine  (20  mglkg,  Lp.)  respectively  and  treatment groups  received  Kombucha  tea at doses of 250, 500, 1000 mglkg,  18 h after administration of reserpine   Mice  were  then  tested  with  forced  swimming  and  rotarod  tests.  At  the  end  of behavioral tests, blood sample were collected and used to assess blood antioxidant capacity. Results: There was significant difference in  the duration of immobility  time between  vehicle and reserpine treated groups (P < O.OOI). Administration  of Kombucha tea at doses of 250, 500 and  1000 mglkg into depressed mice significantly reduced  the duration  of immobility time. KT administration significantly improved blood antioxidant capacity of mice blood.
Conclusion:  These  results  provide  support  for  the  potential  antidepressant  effects  of Kom bucha lea against.

Keywords: Kombucha tea, Depression, Forced swimming test
 


















 

