Background: Ziziphora tenuior have high levels of phenolic and flavonoid antioxidant compounds able be for prevention with oxidative stress.
Objective: In accordance with the limited studies about the effect drinking Ziziphora tenuior on exercise- induced oxidative stress response, this study was conducted to identify the effect of drinking Ziziphora tenuior and one bout aerobic exercise on serum total antioxidant capacity (TAC) and malondiadehyde (MDA) in inactive women.
Methods: Twenty inactive girls (aged 22±2 years, body fat 17±2. %, and VO2max 35±2 ml/kg/min) in a randomized and double-blind design were allocated in two equal groups: were used Drinking Ziziphora tenuior the infusion for 48 hours before exercise, every 24 hours, 3 meals morning, noon and night (2gr per serving in 200 ml of boiling water for each person) in Ziziphora tenuior. were consumed The control group coincides with the group Ziziphora tenuior-like beverages. After a 48-hour all subjects were participated protocol with Bruce on the treadmill. Blood samples obtained before the drinking Ziziphora tenuior along with before and after the exercise protocol. The normal data were expressed as mean (±SD) and analyzed by repeated measure ANOVA, Bonferroni and independent t test at ??0.05.
Results: results show that the short drinking Ziziphora tenuior has not significant effect on oxidative stress index (MDA) (P > 0.05). Moreover, increased the serum MDA was significantly (P < 0.05) decreased one bout aerobic exercise, the serum TAC was significantly (P < 0.05). However, the increased serum MDA and reduced TAC in the placebo group was significantly more than in supplement group (P < 0.05).
Conclusion: The present results show that the increased resting total antioxidative capacity following drinking Ziziphora tenuiorcan, decrease the undesirable alterations of serum MDA in male inactive after one one bout aerobic exercise.

Keywords: Ziziphora tenuior, Antioxidant capacity, Peroxidasion lipidi and stress oxidative

