
Journal uf  kdicinal Plants






Changes in Phytochemical and Morpho-physilogical  Traits of Thyme (Thymus vulgaris CV Varico 3) under Different Salinit}' Levels

 
Hosseini H (M.Sc. Student)1
 
Mousavi-Fanl  S (Ph.D.{,  Fatchi  I < '  (l'h.ll.)3,  Qadcri  A  (l'h.D.)'
 


1	Department of Horticultural Sdcm.'CS. Faculty of Agriculture, Lore <  > tan l !nivcr:.ny,
Iran
2	Department of Hortit.:ultural  Sciences. Faculty of Agriculture, Lorc: > tan  Uuiver:.ity,
Iran
3- Department  of Agriculture, Payame Noor l:nivcrsity  tPN(J). Tehmn. Iran
4 Medicinal Plants Research Center, Institute ofMedk•ina[ P!ams, ACECR, K;: :r;.y, Trun "'Corre$ponding authur: Departmenl  of Horticultural  Sciences. Faculty  of  Agriculture. Loresmn  L'nivasity, Iran
Tel:  +98-913-1854008
Email: sadeghmosavifard@gmail.com

 

Background: Thyme is a valuable medicinal plants that evaluation of its quality and quantity
yield is necessary.
Objective: This study aimed to investigate the effect of salinity on morphological, physiological and phytochemical  traits of thyme.
Methods: The study was carried out as a randomized complete block design at the Institute of Medicinal Plants with 4 levels of salinity treatments including (control, 50, 100 and ISO mM) and three replications. In this study some morphorJhysiologial and phytochemical traits of thyme were measured.
Results: Results showed the significant effect of salinity on Jllant  height,  number  of  lateral shoots, vegetative dry weight, root fresh weight, root dry weight, Length and Width of a Leaf. The results of the means comparison showed that by increasing levels of salioity, sodium content, electrolyte leakage and proline content increased conversely, the amount  of potassium,  relative water content, chlorophyll and  carotenoid were decreased. The content of thymol and carvacrol increased by higher levels of salinity (100 mM sodium chloride) compared with control.
Conclusion: Although the majority of yield related traits negatively affected by salinity but the highest amount of thymol and carvacrol has been achieved in 100 mM NaCI.

Keywords: Thyme (Thymus vulgaris L.), Carvacrol, Thymol, Salt stress










 

