Biosorption is one of the effectively used methods for gathering heavy metals from aquatic solutions. The objective of this study was to assess the effects of wheat straw humification and sterilization on the release of the Pb adsorbed on fresh and humified wheat in aqueous solutions. Wheat straw ( <  2mm) was incubated in 70% moisture content and lab temperature for 60 days. After 1, 20 and 60 days, two sterile and unsterile subsamples were prepared and a high concentration of Pb (800 mg kg-1) was applied to the subsamples in NaNO3 solution (0.001 N) at pH 6. The percentages of the Pb adsorbed on humified wheat straw were significantly higher in unsterile condition (60.96%) compared to the sterile fresh wheat straw (26.96%). The release of the Pb adsorbed on the fresh and humified wheat straw was characterized by an initialy rapid step followed by a slow step. The release of the Pb adsorbed on the sterile and unsterile fresh wheat straw was high and fast, and reached to a zero amount in 4 h.  But the release of the Pb adsorbed on the more humified wheat straw (incubated for 60 days) was not stopped. These result show that more Pb can be retained and immobilized on the humified plant residues compared to the raw plant residues. Comparing R2 and SE of the tested kinetic models showed that the first order model was suitable for applying to the releasing data of Pb from the unsterile-unfermented plant residues (sampled in first and 20th days) and from the sterile -unfermentedplant residues (sampled in first, 20th and 60th days). In contrast, Elovich function model was suitable for the releasing data of Pb from the un-sterile -humified (sampled in 60th day) wheat straw. Results showed that there were different controlling mechanisms in release of Pb from the fresh and humified plant residues. The overall differences in the releasing parameters of Pb between the sterile and un-sterile wheat straw showed the function and ability of the microorganisms in Pb adsorption, retention and immobilization in aqueous solutions.
