

 

...
 
.."-"" --
 







Joumal of Medicinal Plants







The Protective Effects of Iranian Golpar (Heracleum persicum)
Essential Oil in Liver Damages Induced by CC14 in Wistar Rats


Roshanaei K (Ph.D.) 1 ', Dadkhah A (Ph.D.)2 , Fatemi F (Ph.D.)3, Dini S (M.Sc.)'


1-	Department   of   Physiology,   Faculty   of   Science,   Qom   Branch,   Islamic   AzaJ
University, Qom, Iran
2-	Department   of   Medicine,   Faculty   of   Medicine,   Qom   Branch,   Islamic   Azad University, Qom, Iran
3-	Nuclear  Fuel  Cycle  Research  School,  Nuclear  Science  and  Technology  Research
Institute, Tehran, fran
4-	Young Researchers  and  Elite Club,  Karaj  Branch,  Islamic  Azad  University,  Karaj, Iran
*Corresponding  author:  Department  of  Physiology,  Faculty  of  Science,  Qom  Branch,
Islamic AzaJ University, Qom, Iran
Tel: +98-912-55 17562, Fax: +98-253-7770001
E-mail:   Kamhizroshanaei@gmail.com


Abstract

Background: Nowadays, liver disorders arc one of the most serious and threatening problems of the health. Persian Golpar (Ilerac/eum (H.) persicum) as an endemic medicinal plant with antioxidant and anti-inllammatory properties was used (noted) in the study for reducing the live injuries.
Objective: This experiment -for the first time- was conducted to consider the effects of the oils obtained from fruits of Persian Golpar on the liver toxicity induced by the injection of tetrachloride carbon (CCI4) in the Wistar rats.
Methods: In this study, 100 male Wistar rats were divided into  20  groups  (n=S).  Negative control group (NC) received  DMSO and olive oil for two weeks and the positive control group
(C) received  DMSO as i.p injection  in  14 days following CCI4 (2 mllkg b.w) at day  IS'". The
standard group (BHT), The treatment groups received H. persicum essential oils at both  doses 100 and 200 mg/kg b.w as i.p injection following CCI4 (2 ml/kg b.w) at day Js'•. Then, the levels
of the glutathione (GSH), total antioxidant capacity of plasma  (FRAP),  proxidasion  lipids (MDA) and glutathione s-transferase (GST) and also liver  enzymes  for  instance  alanin teransferase (ALT) and aspartate  teransferase (AST) were estimated at 4, 8, 16 and  24 h after CCL4 injection.
Results: The injection of the essential oils (at the both doses) obtained from Persian Golpar could surprisingly modulate the changes of the antioxidant/oxidative parameters as well as liver enzymes induced by CCL4 administration.
Conclusion: These results indicated the protective effect of Iranian Golpar essential oils on the liver. These effects are probably due to its antioxidant capacity.

Keywords: Heracleum persicum, Antioxidant/oxidative stress, Essential oil, Hepatotoxicity, Liver enzymes


 

