Abstract  Organizational integrity much attention has been in recent years as a mechanism for control and prevention of corruption.  Organizational integrity has been highly regarded as a mechanism for controlling and preventing administrative corruption in recent years. The aim of this study is to investigate the relationship between organizational social capital and organizational integrity in two dimensions of transparency and accountability. In this study, organizational social capital was measured with three relational, structural ad cognitive components. The research is applied one. The research method is surveying and data collection tool is the questionnaire. The population of this study is 1070 employees of National Iranian Gas Company. 204 employees were selected according to Cochran formula and through random stratified sampling.  Data extracted from this sample was analyzed using SPSS software and Pearson correlation test, regression analysis, and path analysis. The research findings show moderate to high correlation of social capital and organizational integrity. The average of organizational integrity was estimated at a moderate level.  Common objectives, expectations, cooperation, intimacy, commitment and relationship type are among affective components in regression analysis. Overall, half (50 percent) of organizational integrity changes are explained by the measured components of organizational social capital in this study.   The aim of this study is to investigate the relationship between organizational social capital with organizational integrity emphasis on transparency and accountability. Organizational social capital investigates with three components of relational, structural ad cognitive. The research method employed in this study, based on survey and data collection tool, was a questionnaire. The population of this study consisted of National Iranian Gas Company with 1070 employees that 204 employees randomly with stratified sampling were chosen. Data extracted from the sample using spss software and Pearson correlation test, regression analysis, and path analysis have analyzed. Our Findings show that the correlation coefficients of social capital showed a significantly positive affection on organizational integrity. The mean of organizational integrity in this study is on average. The findings of regression also show that common objective, expectations, cooperation, intimacy and commitment from dimension of organizational social capital has a significant effect on organizational integrity. The regression results show 50% variation in organizational integrity can be explained by organizational social capital.
