Abstract 
Numerous studies that have recently been done about the important issue of life indicates that this problem is including various dimensions, in a way that it has been studied in both philosophy of religion which concerns the purposeful dimension of life and ethical themes which discusses about volubility of life also it evaluates the performance and advantage of life, the aspect which concerns the purposefulness if life is the most important one.
In the present research and in discussing about the creation or the discovering of the meaning we are mostly confronted with the aim and purpose in the discussion about meaning, sometimes aim is attributed to a creature that has knowledge and freedom and sometimes it is related to a creature that has none of these factors. A creature that has knowledge and freedom in all of itsactsis considered a destination that is called purpose or aim. If the aim is concealed in itself and in the freewilled creature, it is called self structured aim but if it is out of the creature and is related to other creatures is external aim and it is not selfstructured.By comparing human and the world, we can find that life in its nature has not self structured aim because the aim must be seek in a factor out of that is owner of knowledge and freedom. But this is not correct about human because human has knowledge and freedom, so it has self structured aim. Answer to these questions is related to view of accosted person in a way that a secular person cannot realize the perpetual creator and his responses are physical. Also divine person responded in another way and by considering a hypothesis that has a good life. Only difference between a divine and a physical person is that final factor to physical person is nature, but divine person considered nature as a part of a larger factor as supra nature.  Regarding to these backgrounds, a question is indicated that: is life meaning discoverable or fake able? Answer to this question in view of aim or value is reason of this factor that life has a specific meaning. It means that that meaning that is concealed in life is the one that we discovered it, but some others believed that it is impossible because human create his life by his deeds. Some deeds such as create a good work, experiencing a special condition or war against life problems and accepting difficulties and pains. As we saw in Kierkegaard philosophy, he supported the Christ religion and he was believed that to have a meaningful life, we must have attempts such as Jesus to do God recommendations in an appropriate way. So meaning for philosopher and his recommendations is a discoverable and objective factor. But in contrast, there are some people that ignore contemporary human and consider his life as an absurd factor that is following with a force. Main index of meaningfulness to these people is freedom and knowledge of human that is accessible by helping awareness. These people believe that human is responsible to meaning source that has emphasized on his subjective life to access to a meaningful life so they considered meaning as a subjective and fake able factor. The French existentialist philosopher, Sartre, is one of these thinkers, while he is follower of Kierkegaard but these two philosophers have basic disagreements in philosophy and metaphysics fields and specially in discovering meaning or fakeness. So we attempt to investigate disagreement points and agreement points of Kierkegaard and Sartre about problem of fakeness or discover life meaning. In other word, innovation of discussion in philosophical discussions and specially in religion philosophy create some interests in above discussion that is useful to reader and it is hope to success in this discussion.
