Introduction
Rise of nation states, brought fundamental changes to attitudes and understanding of people towards government and brought about numerous achievements such as accountability of rulers and overall acceptance of politicoeconomic activities of state authorities by the public. Nowadays, political and economic stability could not be realized through coercive means and all governments are bound to secure consent and approval of their citizens, a process which could be termed as legitimization and popularity or acceptability of government. Within the political lexicon of our time, the term legitimacy is used to define and evaluate the level of satisfaction of people from their government. It is said that, when a government has no balanced and reasonable relations with its own people and is caught up with internal resentment and instability, such government could be considered as illegitimate and unacceptable. On the contrary, when a government and its agents are trusted by people, then such government could be described as legitimate and acceptable. Large part of discussions about legitimacy and acceptability are associated with performance of government in various economic, political and social sectors. There are numerous issues that affects the legitimacy and acceptability of government. Trafficking of goods is one of those phenomenon that has economic, social as well as political and territorial impacts and fallouts. At first glance, the terms legitimacy and trafficking or smuggling look quite alien to each other with no meaningful correlation between them. Legitimacy is a political concept with entirely positive meaning while trafficking is a term with quite negative connotation in economy and criminology. But when stability or instability of a country is under scrutiny and analysis, many corelations could be found between them. Trafficking is a way of misappropriation and exploitation by opportunist by groups and individuals which could affect efficiency and consequently popularity of a government and face it with serious challenges. The way rulers deal with smuggling and the actual and legal reaction to this phenomenon, influences attitudes of people toward effectiveness of the government (establishment) and in fact their judgement about legitimacy of their rulers. This article is an attempt aimed at defining the role of trafficking in legitimacy and popularity of government.
 
Matherial &amp; Methods
This study is based on developmental research work, carried out by explaining the causeandeffect relationship of two variables through descriptive and analytical methods. Inductive reasoning has been employed for Analysis of findings and evaluation of the hypothesis.
Smuggling is affects state apparatus including its material basis like population and territory. The relationship between trafficking and the material basis of government is evaluated mainly with threat against its components. The threat against this sector is the same in every country. Since a country is dependent on its material foundations, therefore protecting this sector against any possible threat, becomes the first national security priority and trafficking is considered as one of the main threat against economic basis of a nation.
Trafficking is also associated with legitimacy of government. Trafficking paves the way widespread corruption and corruption for its part, undermines legitimacy of law enforcement agencies. Corruption is the byproduct of a weak and inefficient government and itself diminishes efficiency of the state. When a citizen pays bribe in order to benefit from a public service or scape retribution for breaking the law, he/she might look at the paid bribe as the cost of the received service or have quite different interpretation of it and look at bribe as a pure bonanza and graft or what is known as rente. However, such illegal payment to receive some favor undermines his trust on public institutions and in long run ruins government’s legitimacy and popularity.
 
 
Discussion of Results &amp; Conclusions: 
The philosophy of government and its institutions are inseparably interwoven. With respect to impact of trafficking on reason d’etre of government, government’s approach towards trafficking is a decisive factor. Some goods are considered as contraband because they contradict the very foundation of the government. Trafficking of such goods not only reflects weakness of the government and incompetence of law enforcement agencies, but demonstrate serious antagonism of some segments of society towards their government in general and in fact target the foundation of government, items such as trafficking of alcoholic drinks in an Islamic state.
On impact of trafficking on governmental institutions and country’s laws and regulation, it could be said that the extent of trafficking, has direct effect on credibility of state bodies and controlling institutions and such development would lead to mutual distrust between government and people. Corruption within law enforcement agencies such as police, customs and border guards, will turn trafficking to a major source of income in absence of economic resources and expose low ranking employees to corruption and will result in sever instability. Involvement of high ranking state officials in trafficking and corruption in one hand will boost the support for organized crimes and at the same time will prevent allocation of resources to actual and real goals and  end up in further state failure.
Trafficking also affects proper control of borders by government and inability of a government in safeguarding it borders, will diminish its external legitimacy. In some occasions, security forces of a neighboring country, while pursuing smugglers, will trespass into its territory and undermine its independence and territorial integrity. Meanwhile, contraband goods also endanger public and individual health and cause numerous health hazards and create considerable problem and challenges for the government.
An overall review of costs and numerous damages inflicted by trafficking on society, it becomes clear that all aspects of life of community members are affected by this phenomenon and no segment of society benefits from this menace.
Trafficking is one of the most evident signs of socioeconomic corruption which can interrupt functioning of state institutions. Efficiency, productivity and effectiveness are undermined because of corruption and objective and perspectives of a nation can be easily distorted by this phenomenon. Therefore, trafficking can threaten national integrity and social stability in all areas and slacken economic and political development and consequently undermine legitimacy and credibility of government. On the other hand, when credibility, popularity and effectiveness of government is undermined, its credibility and respect erodes among people and effective governance becomes problematic.
