Abstract 
Introduction: High fat diet leads to liver apoptosis, steatosis and inflammation, elevated liver enzymes, lipid peroxidation and free radicals. Vinegars contribute to apoptosis pathway and can reduce steatosis, inflammation and lipid profiles. Balsamic vinegar has strong radical scavenging ability and a high polyphenol concentration.
Objective: The aim of this study was to evaluate antiapoptotic and protective effects of balsamic vinegar on liver tissues and lipid profiles in rats under high fat diets.
Materials and Methods: Male wistar rats (n=24) were divided into 3 groups (n=8): control, high fat diet(HFD), HFD & balsamic vinegar(BV). Control group received 16.6 % Kcal per day, and the other two groups received high fat diet (HFD) 51.6 % containing canola oil. After 4 month group 3 in addition to HFD received a balsamic vinegar (0.51 mg/kg) for 6 weeks orally through their water. In the end of experiment, bloodletting and liver biopsy were performed. Serum liver enzymes and lipid profiles level were evaluated using photometric method. Apoptosisevaluation was performed with immunohistochemistry TUNEL method, and steatosis, inflammation and fibrosis were evaluated with H&E and Tri Chrome Malory staining. The data were analyzed using ANOVA and Tuckey post hoc test. P value less than 0.05 was considered significant. 
Results: Vinegar makes a significant reduction in liver apoptosis, steatosis, inflammation and central vein fibrosis (p < 0.001). Triglyceride levels decreased significantly in the group treated with vinegar (p <  0.001). However, no significant difference in LDL and total cholesterol levels was observed between high-fat diet and balsamic vinegar. Serum levels of HDL in the group treated with vinegar, compared to high-fat diet group, showed a significant increase (p < 0.01). Vinegar did not make a significant difference in liver enzyme levels.
Conclusion: This study showed that daily use of balsamic vinegar in rats under high-fat diet for 6 weeks, had protective effects on the liver tissue, and can increase serum levels of HDL, decrease TG and liver tissue apoptosis and steatosis, but no effect on the level of liver enzymes.

