Introduction: Noise pollution means a level of sound in the environment that is uncomfortable for its residents. In hospitals, ICU is a place where most of the other wards are affected by its sound.Given the  different environment and structure of Rasht hospitals from other centers and lack of study on this environment, we feel the need for this study.
Objective:The aim of this study is to determine the level of noise in Rasht Hospital’s Intensive Care Units.
Materials and Methods:In this Descriptive-analytical study, we included 7 ICU at theGuilanUniversity of Medical Sciences hospitals inRasht)i.e., Pousina, Razi, Alzahra, Velayat, Amiralmomenin and Heshmat).The tool used was a sound meter CEL-450 model and the researchers after calibration, measured sound levels in two ways of local and environmental. Data were analyzed by SPSS  softwareand presented with descriptive and inferential statistics, ANOVA and Pearson.
Results: The results showed that in local method, the highest mean (Laeq)was in nursing station (66.93 dB), patient bed (62.16 dB) , next door corridor (69.76 dB) related to general ICU in Razi hospital, ventilator (66.60 dB) related to NeurosurgeryICU in  Poursinahospitaland hall meeting (63.60 dB) related to ENTICU in Amiralmomenin hospital. Also(Laeq),   a statistically significant difference was observed between the environmental method in any desired three times(P =0.0001).The mean sound level of  the ICU was higher (in the morning) than that in the evening.There was a significant relationship between the average sound and BOR(Inpatient Bed Occupancy Rate)(P=0.027).
Conclusion: Overall, the results showed that the total equivalent sound level (Laeq) in all parts of the ICU, compared to international standards and EPA Iran, is even greater. Therefore, it is recommended to reduce it through proper planning and management (sound equipment and ventilation systems, the use of sound-absorbing material in the ceiling and walls, etc.) as well as  promoting staff awareness,  and providing related training course.
Conflict of interest: none declared

