Introduction: Human papillomavirus (HPV) as the most common sexually transmitted disease, is directly associated with cervical cancer. The survey of knowledge and attitudes is a central point in determining the most appropriate strategies for effective intervention plan. Medical students as future public health workers can promote the community awareness about cervical cancer and how to prevent it. 
Objective: Hence, researchers decided to survey the HPV knowledge and attitudes of the medical students.
Materials and Methods: In this cross-sectional study, 201 medical students were randomly selected. A questionnaire consisting of two parts of awareness (36 questions) and attitude (9 questions) was used. Scores higher than the average were defined as good knowledge and attitudes. CVI and CVR were calculated for validity and the values of both were greater than 90%. Reliability was assessed using Cronbach's alpha that was more than 80 %. The collected data were analyzed by SPSS software version 19.
Results: In this study, mean age of medical students was 24.8±1.66 years and 56.2% of them were female. The source of information about HPV in 83.1 % of students was medical courses. The mean score obtained from the knowledge questionnaire was 18.9 ± 4.37 and 57.2% of students had poor knowledge about HPV. Knowledge was significantly related with age (P=0.002), taking lessons in virology (P=0.0001) and source of information (P=0.038). The mean score obtained from attitude questionnaires was 23.57±3.29 and 57.2% of students had good attitudes. Attitude about human papilloma virus was significantly related with taking lessons in virology (P=0.01) and source of information (P=0.007).A positive correlation between the scores of knowledge and attitude among medical students was seen (P > 0.0001).
Conclusion: This study showed that the knowledge in more than half of the students was poor, however, the attitude in more than half of students was good. Plan for training programs to increase student awareness about HPV during their educational course is suggested.
Conflict of interest: None declared.

