In recent years, increased use of internet to conduct business electronically and globalization of business have forced producers of goods to re-examine the production and distribution of their products. Cellular manufacturing (CM) is an innovative manufacturing strategy, which is derived from a group technology (GT) concept. This approach can be used to improve both flexibility and efficiency in today’s modern competitive manufacturing environments, such as flexible manufacturing systems (FMS). Some benefits of CM performance are reduction of setup time, reduction of work-in-process inventory, reduction of material handling cost, machine utilization improvement, and quality improvement. In a dynamic environment, we require the development of organizations and facilities to be more flexible. This work directed us to combine the dynamic model of cellular manufacturing system and supply chain, taking into account different issues such as the existence of multi plants, multi markets, several warehouse, different suppliers, multi periods, and reconfigurations. In this paper, an integrated dynamic cellular manufacturing system model is proposed, which takes into account both production planning and supply chain design. The objective of this model is to reduce costs such as inter-cell movement cost, intra-cell movement cost; to keep parts in stock, outsourced parts, establishment of warehouse, replacement of parts are shipped from the plant to the warehouse, from warehouse to markets, from plant to market, and so on. In addition, considering the candidate sites for the construction of warehouse, locating the warehouses outside the factory is discussed, which has not been considered in previous papers. Furthermore, with adding the phrase of machine splitting in the objective function and constraints, it is attempted to improve the dynamic cellular manufacturing system. This term prevents the excessive split of one type of machine in the several cells and optimizes the placement of existing machines. Finally, computational results are investigated and solved through GAMS software to show the validity and importance of the presented model. 
