Introduction: With respect to low emotional intelligence in opiate addicts rather than general population, we conducted this study to determine the effect of education on their emotional intelligence and quality of life.
Objective: To Determent the Impact of Education on Emotional Intelligence and Quality of Life of the Patients Undergoing Methadone Maintenance Therapy
Materials and Methods: This study was performed as a pre-test post-test quasi-experimental study with control group. Sixty men with methadone maintenance therapy were selected from center of addiction of Shafa Hospital, Rasht. Thirty drug abusers randomly participated in educationalsessionswhich were held by a psychiatry resident. The training program consists of eight 90-minute sessions that were presented during the 8 weeks. Emotional Intelligence and quality of life of these individuals were compared with the control group. To measure these variables, we used Bar- on and SF-36 questionnaire, respectively. The resulting data were analyzed with using chi-square, student t and paired t tests. A significant statistic less than 0.05 were considered significant. 
Result: The mean age of participants in intervention and control groups were 33.1±6.5 and 36.3±6.3 years (P > 0.05). Educational intervention were significantly improved emotional intelligence of participants and their quality of life compared totheir scores inpre-intervention (P <  0.0001 and P < 0.0001, respectively). Also 3 months after intervention, intervention group had greater emotional intelligence and quality of life scores rather than pre-intervention and control group (P <  0.0001 and P <  0.0001, respectively).
Conclusion: This study showed impact of education on the improvement of emotional intelligence and quality of life of the patients with methadone maintenance therapy. However, all participants were male and the results of this study were interpreted cautiously. We recommend further studies about this issue. 
Conflict of interest: none declared.

