OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study is to investigate the relationship of trunk muscles endurance
with chronic low back pain (CLBP) and their comparison between healthy females and low back pain ones.
BACKGROUND: Perhaps Low back pain after cold is prevalent malady and much percent of various
people suffered by this pain. Too sporadic researches with inconclusive and inconsistent result are available
that emphasize on relation between weaknesses of trunk muscles endurance. researchers showed that
decreases in Endurance of trunk extensors muscles have important reason to creation and development of
low back pain. Rissanen found no relation between endurance of trunk muscles and low back pain. Hamberg
concluded that strength and endurance of trunk muscle do not have any relation with low back pain. research
found relation between endurance of trunk Flexor muscles and low back pain. In conclusion, there is
inconclusive evidence for a relation between trunk muscle endurance and the risk of low back pain because
the results were not consistent; furthermore Considering the differences which exist in culture the way of life
and habits of our society etc. the researches done in western countries can not be completely applied to our
own society.
METHODS: this research
is descriptive and comparative. The statistical society include of twenty four
healthy Females(group A) and Sixteen Females with CLBP(group B) between twenty five and fifty five
years old, non  Athletic Staff of Tehran University. These persons are chosen by individual information
Questionnaires. in the present research isometric endurance of trunk extensor muscles by Biering  SØrensen
test, isometric endurance of trunk flexor muscles by Trunk flexor endurance test(McGill), the degree of
disability individuals with CLBP by Oswestry and Quebec Questionnaires and intensity of pain by Visual
Analog Scale are assessed and gained information is analyzed by descriptive statistical, t - independent test
and pearson correlation coefficient test, in (
۰.۰۱) significant level, in spss  windows virtual space (Version
۱٦).
RESULTS: Among the two factors tested, endurance of the trunk extensor muscles had the high association
with CLBP, and there was no relationship between the trunk flexor Muscles endurance and CLBP. Also, our
results demonstrated that isometric trunk extensor endurance was significantly lower in group B than in
group A, but there is no difference in isometric trunk flexor Muscles endurance between groups.
CONCLUTION: findings of research shows that the most important and effective factor in creating CLBP
and intensifying and its revocable caused decrease trunk extensor muscles endurance and easily fatigue of
these muscles that can predict LBP occurence in future. However, trunk flexor Muscles endurance factor
don’t have prediction value about individuals LBP.
