lack of precipitation but also from unsuitable distribution. Agricultural sector consumes
major part of the fresh water resources among other sectors. Thus, it is important to
increase water use efficiency (WUE) and practical ways to maintain soil water. The super
absorbent polymers are indeed water containers that absorb and retain large quantities of
water when applied into the soil. These materials have the property of releasing the
absorbed water, allowing plant to consume enough water at any growth stage. The
objective of this study was to determining suitable parametric model for estimate property
soil-polymer in different wetting-drying cycles, two polymers, TA-100 and TA-200, were
applied in a loamy and sandy soil. The treatments were consisted of 0, 0,25, 0,5, 0,75 and 1 g
of both polymers per each kg of dry-weighted soil in 3 replicates. The water content for
each treatment at 0, 100, 300, 500, 1000, ٣٠٠٠, ٥٠٠٠ and ١٥٠٠٠ kPa, was measured. The soil
water retention curves (WRC) were obtained for each soil sample. The samples were then
oven-dried and re-wetted for ٥ consequent times and the WRCs were again obtained. The
results indicated that by applying more polymers in the soils, the water content at any soil
water pressure head was increased. However, this influence was declined for next ٤ dryingwetting
cycles. The most dominant influence of the superabsorbent polymers on water
holding at each drying-wetting cycle was appeared on lower soil water pressure heads (٠-
٥٠٠٠ kPa). The comparison between TA-١٠٠ and TA-٢٠٠ polymers indicated that not only
TA-٢٠٠ had larger water holding capacity, but also appeared to absorb more water than
TA-١٠٠ during the next ٤ cyclic periods. The parametric analysis of the retention curves
were indicated that Θs و n and Θr parameters were increased by applying more polymers in
all treatments. However, the magnitude of Θr variations was not considerable. It was also
observed that the α parameter was decreased in sandy soil and increased in loamy soil by
applying any type of superabsorbent. Finally, estimating of parameters by Van Genukhten
model had better results than boordin and Brooks-koorey models.
