Used oil analysis is comparable to a medical analysis with a blood test. Like blood, lubricating oil contains a good deal of information about the envelope in which it circulates. Wear of metallic parts, for example produces a lot of minute particles, which are carried by the lubricantThese small metal particles can give information about the machine elements that are wearing, and can be detected by various methods, for example, Atomic Emission Spectrometry. Determination of larger particles can be done using optical or electronic microscopy, or ferrography The acidity of an oil shows whether the oil is oxidized as a result of operation at high temperature, if there is a high percentage of moisture, or whether the oil has been in service for too long. The viscosity of the oil is a very important parameter and must be in conformity with the requirements of the machine builder. The alkalinity or the loss of alkalinity of the oil, proves that the oil is in contact with inorganic acids such as sulphuric acid or nitric acid Also, practical experience shown that this technique provides useful information to choose the best time for machine lubricant replacement in different using working condition The objective of this research is to choose and investigate the best time replacement of oil for Crane LIEBHERR LHM 1200-HD that works near the sea in marine company by oil condition monitoring. This was achieved by investigating different oil sample analysis of Crane LIEBHERR LHM 1200-HD. The oil analyses were initially run under regular interval during machines life. A series of tests were then conducted under the operating hours of machine. Oil samples were regularly collected. Numerical data produced by oil
analyses were compared with another sample, in order to quantify the effectiveness of the results of oil condition monitoring technique. The results from this paper have given more understanding on the dependent and independent roles of oil analyses in predicting which oil is more suitable for working machine condition
