Objective Ageing is associated with some physiologic and functional declines that can increase disability, frailty, and falls in the elderly, so balance is used as a factor in determining the level of independence of the elderly. On the other hand, the mean velocity is considered as the most reliable indicator of the center of pressure to assess the balance and reduce the risk of falling. Because of significant effects of balance and muscle strength in the health of the more elderly population, the purpose this study was to investigate the effects of a nine- weeks training program on the center of pressure indicators with open and closed eyes condition in the elderly male.
Materials & Methods In this study, 27 elderly subjects with general health were participated voluntarily in this study. These were randomly divided into two training groups (n=15, mean age=61.5&plusmn;08.59 years, weight=77.10&plusmn;07.23 kg, height=167.6&plusmn;6.4 cm) and control (n=12, mean age=62.6&plusmn;08.44 years, weight=72.07&plusmn;08.06 kg, height=167.9&plusmn;01.08 cm). To assess the balance subjects were placed in a steady state on the foot scan at the beginning of the work, and the mean velocity of the center of pressure was first recorded in a static state with open eyes and then closed eyes. The kinetic data of the foot scan (mean velocity of the center of pressure) was calculated by RS-scan software, and the mean of the data was extracted from Excel software and evaluated. The training group then performed a nine-week program of lower limb muscle resistance training (on seven lower limb muscle groups including adductor and abductor of femurs, flexors, and extensor of femurs, flexors and extensor of knee, and plantar flexor of ankle) for 1.5 hour (15 minutes warm up, 1 hour of the main exercise, 15 minutes of cool down) and three sessions per week. During this period, the control group was requested to perform its daily activities. After completing the resistance training program, post-test was performed. Data were analyzed using independent and dependent T-analysis at a significant level (P&le;0.05).
Results Lower limb muscle resistance training for nine weeks yielded a significant improvement in mean velocity of COP (P=0.005, t=3.07) and static balance with open eyes (P=0.004, t=3.46). In the training group, it has been pre-tested; however, no statistically significant effect was observed in static balance with closed eyes (P=0.15, t=1.49 ). Resistance training showed a significant difference between the control and the training group in the mean overall velocity of the center of pressure (P=0.04, t=2.43) and static balance with open eyes (P=0.01, t=2.39) as determined by independent t-test. This difference was not significant between two groups in static balance with closed eyes (P=0.22, t=1.25).
Conclusion The lower extremity muscle resistance training improves the center of pressure, static balance and reduces the fall risk. It is suggested that planning sufficient physical activities and training among all age groups is necessary. Appropriate resistance training program can prevent balance disorders and falling among the elderly population.

