Objective This study aims at examining the relationship between performance evaluation and therapist's job motivation based on Herzberg&rsquo;s two-factor model.
Materials & Methods This study was a cross-sectional study conducted in 1394 that was performed on 80 rehabilitation therapists working in rehabilitation centers and government hospitals in Tehran. Sampling was done by cluster sampling method. The data collection tool included two standard questionnaires that employed performance evaluation and Herzberg's 40 material job motivation. Before any analysis, the variables were tested for normality with the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Based on the normality of variables, data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, independent t-test and Pearson correlation by SPSS software.
Results The results showed that from therapists&rsquo; point of view, 90% of them stated that performance of the organization was essential and 88.8% said that performance evaluation was effective on job motivation. However, 55.7% of therapists, did not like the current performance evaluation. In this study, there was no significant relationship between therapist&rsquo;s job motivation and performance evaluation (P=0.47). From therapists&rsquo; point of view, the motivational factors (internal) had greater importance than hygiene factors (external). Accordingly, this study is in line with Herzberg's research. Job quality, responsibilities of job, job level, job security and salary had the highest role in motivation and effective performance. Based on the results of the statistical tests, no significant correlation was found between demographic variables such as gender, education level, marital status, place of work and rehabilitation therapists&rsquo; degree of performance evaluation. A significant correlation was observed between therapists&rsquo; work experience variable with performance evaluation and Herzberg's motivation theory (P=0.04). According to the results, the relationship between employment type of rehabilitation therapists and performance evaluation was significant (P<0.006). There was a significant relationship between age and job motivation theory of Herzberg in the therapists community (P=0.02).&nbsp;
Conclusion It seems that with regard to the difficulty of rehabilitation therapists&rsquo; job, it is essential that necessary training for supervisors and managers and directors are organized in order to achieve organizational objectives by taking advantage of the performance standards and evaluation criteria. This will lead to an increase in the rehabilitation therapists&rsquo; job motivation and provide for them work progress and greater encouragement.

