Objective According to a report published by the World Health Organization in 2011, 15% of the world's population is disabled, which sums up to more than a billion people. People with disabilities comprise the largest group of people in Asia. Communities can facilitate the participation of people with disabilities in society by creating an atmosphere that is appropriate for them, an activity which involves the urban modification of the environment. Therefore, this study aimed at determining the attitude of managers and staff with respect to urban modification for people afflicted with disabilities in the municipality of Tehran city.
Methods & Materials A cross-sectional, descriptive - analytic study that was conducted by cross - sectional method, that was used with the help of a valid and reliable questionnaire &ldquo;Assessment of attitude of managers and staffs in about urban modification for people with disabilities&rdquo;. The study population comprised all managers and staffs who were working with urban modification in the municipality of Tehran City. Questionnaires were distributed among 16 managers and experts working in the modification staff of the municipality of Tehran. A total of 162 people working in one of the deputies, were selected by census to participate in the study. This study measured attitude of mangers and staffs were working in the municipality of Tehran, towards urban modification for people with disabilities in Tehran city. The Levene test was used to determine for the equality of variances. To calculate whether there is a statistically significant difference between the means of the two groups, the independent t-test was used carried out. For a comparison between two groups and ANOVA was also used to compare between the groups. Data analyzed by using The findings were evaluated using Software SPSS22.
Results The findings showed that the attitude of 17 (6.9%) mangers and staffs regarding urban modification for people with disabilities was at the intermediate level. The attitude of 112 persons (9.62%) was at high levels and that of 49 persons (27.5%) was at a very good level. The average score of attitudes of manager and staffs who were familiar with disabilities was higher than those who were unfamiliar with disabilities. In addition, the average attitude score of women was better than that of men. The mean score of the attitude of people aged 55 years and older, having a Master's degree and above, and those having 12-17 years of work experience was higher than others. No significant difference was found between the groups with respect to gender (P=0.37) and responsibility (P=0.37). However, there was a significant difference between the two groups with respect to familiarity with disabilities (P=0.01) and education (P=0.001).&nbsp;
Conclusion This study showed that there is a significant difference in the attitude of managers and staff of municipality regarding urban modification. Recruiting people with higher educational qualifications and awareness or familiarity with the phenomenon of disability could help in the process of urban modification in the community. It is recommended to utilize the findings of this study to formulate urban modification programs across communities for the benefit of the disabled.

