The objective of the research is to consider the relationship between job satisfaction and organizational citizenship behavior amongst Marun petrochemical personnel. Research method is descriptive and survey type. Statistical Society of the research include Marun petrochemical personnel with the total of 296 individuals within which using available random sampling method and on the basis of Morgan table a number of 175 individuals were selected as subjects. For data collection, two standard questionnaires of personnel job satisfaction evaluation and organizational questionnaire citizenship behavior evaluation were used. Descriptive statistics methods include: average, percentage, frequency and inferential statistics, such as: Pearson correlation coefficient, Independent t-test, standard deviation and multiple regression, and also SPSS version 19 software for data collected analysis were utilized. Research findings indicated that there is a significant relationship between job satisfaction and Marun petrochemical personnel organizational citizenship behavior. Information obtained from one variable t-test represents that job satisfaction status and Marun petrochemical personnel organizational citizenship behavior are relatively at a desirable level. Findings emanated from independent test indicate that the type of sex effects on Marun petrochemical personnel job satisfaction and female personnel benefit more job satisfaction than male personnel. Also Pearson correlation test indicated that among quintuple dimensions of organizational citizenship behavior; components of job conscience, respect and reverence and citizenship virtue have significant relationship with Marun petrochemical personnel job satisfaction, but two components of altruism and chivalry don’t have significant relationship with personnel job satisfaction. Also results emanated from regression indicated that among job satisfaction quintuple dimensions; only components of salary and colleagues, have the capability of Marun petrochemical personnel organizational citizenship behavior anticipation. Finally explaining research limitations, regarding the related literature and results emanated from research, solutions and suggestions for improvement of job satisfaction and organizational citizenship behavior was provided.
