E-commerce is accounted as one of the new emerging phenomena in the business arena and during its short life has been able to allocate a noticeable volume of world’s equations to itself. In this alignment, this research intends to act in terms of expressing and considering the effective factors on admitting online purchase in Isfahan Province as its main objective. 
This research regarding the objective is applied and as for performance procedure is survey descriptive considers the hypothesis of “there are effective factors in admitting online purchase”.  For information collection, a research finding questionnaire to be filled out was delivered to 172 Internet users and inhabitants of Isfahan with the age of more than 15 years. Validity of the questionnaire through enforcement of opinions of pundits was emanated and reliability of the questionnaire was confirmed through Chronbach’s Alpha coefficient with the amount of 0.826 which was formed in an introductory study with the distribution of 30 questionnaires. 
In this research for considering and comparing the collected information, the existing methods in descriptive statics such as frequency distribution tables, average, percentage, and variance were utilized and in the inferential statistics also for description of phenomena and considering the relationships among variables statistical tests have been used. For analysis and application of these tests SPSS software was used.  In considering the main hypothesis, regarding that the response variable is a two valued variable, for considering the relationship between the mentioned variables one logistic regression model was utilized. In addition, since some of demographic variables such as educations, income, age and marital status may be effective on response variable as well these variables also have been selected as explanatory variables. For finding appropriate model for explaining the possibility of Internet purchase admittance through the help of 9 type factors the model selection method of retrogressive comparing likelihood functions was used. 
In this research all together the 9 type factors of website characteristics, risk feeling, services quality, relief, price, product variety, individual norms, customer resources, product guarantee and demographic factors were considered which finally a model made of elements of risk feeling, customer resources, academic educations and income, were suggested as effecting factors on online purchase admission. Meanwhile this research indicated that amongst the effecting factors, academic educations involve the maximum and customer resources have the minimum effect on the online purchase admission. 

