Marketing strategists are always facing with challenges to achieve markets and obtain potential customers. One of the most important challenges in their marketing strategic planning is to find the motivation of consumers to purchase and use of a commodity. Marketing managers know well that in their plans to achieve more and stable share in the market, they must acquire the necessary awareness of the factors affecting consumer incentives in their purchase intention and try to meet these needs. Luxury clothing are different with garments that are purchased quotidian, these products in addition to being required, they meet social needs such as social comparison and consumers through its purchase, show their personality. During their lifespan, people have different shopping behavior and some of the consumers selecting the commodity follow their age-related culture. Therefore, the main objective of this research was considering the effective factors on the consumption status of in luxury clothing purchase intention including: Social comparison and fashion innovation. Statistical society in this research is all customers who have purchased at least two times from the luxury clothing stores in the city of Isfahan. Since the statistical society is unlimited, in order to get the sample size the relationship of Cochran was used whose subject number of 224 individuals were obtained. Information collection tool was the researcher created questionnaire whose validity using opinions of the supervisor, experts and management pundits and its Stability through Cronbach's alpha index were obtained which has contained personal information and main and special expertise questions of research hypotheses consideration. The collected information was analyzed by SPSS software through statistical tests at two levels of descriptive (frequency, mean and standard deviation) and inferential (t-test, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, factor analysis test, path analysis test and Friedman test). The results obtained from the path analysis test and regression test indicated, the fashion social and innovative comparison on the consumption status in luxury clothing repurchase has a significant and positive effect and on the other hand the consumption status has a significant and positive effect on luxury clothing repurchase.
