 Background Melasma (called Kalaf in Iranian traditional medicine)
                            is a common acquired hypermelanosis that affects sun-exposed areas of
                            skin. Several factors including exposure to sunlight, pregnancy, and
                            endocrine diseases increase the risk for Melasma. In traditional
                            medicine, antecedent philosophers and physicians have tried to
                            understand the nature and mechanisms of different systems of the human
                            body for the diagnosis and management of Melasma; they have offered
                            different solutions for it. This study is important since Melasma is a
                            disease causing mental side effects in patients, due to darkness and
                            opacity of the skin; therefore, the treatment of Melasma in terms of its
                            psychological complications is of particular importance. In addition,
                            texts of Iranian traditional medicine contain a wealth of nutritional
                            advice for patients with Melasma. These texts have, until now, not yet
                            been reviewed. The present study has considered the most important
                            references of Iranian traditional medicine texts. Objectives The
                            objective of this study was to extract and categorize the nutritional
                            advice of Iranian traditional medicine texts for the treatment of
                            Melasma. Results Dietary recommendations, not only for treatment but
                            also for prevention of diseases and staying healthy, are very efficient.
                            Conclusions Based on the traditional medicine texts, it is helpful to
                            avoid Soda-producing food as well as to identify appropriate food in
                            order to eliminate the accumulation of Soda or black bile from the
                            blood. This study offers a set of analytical and clinical research on
                            food, which in traditional medicine is called Soda-producing as well as
                            Soda reducing. 
