In this paper, a novel technique is presented for inverse kinematics and motion
planning of a redundant manipulator robot in an environment with unknown obstacles
using a fuzzy controlling is presented. Kinematic redundancy occurs when a
manipulator possesses more degrees of freedom than the minimum number required
for executing a given task. Redundancy enhances the manipulator dexterity and
flexibility which allows the redundant robot to move faster and safer in the
environment without colliding with obstacles. In order to avoid colliding with
obstacles, a high degree of freedom robot was used. Due to high degree of
freedom, inverse kinematics of redundant robots is very difficult, thus a general
approach to motion planning of a redundant manipulator robot is very practical
and valuable. It was inspired that a human arm is capable of avoiding colliding
obstacles. Therefore, in this paper, direct control of end effector position of
manipulator using a multi- behavior fuzzy controller, inspired by behavior of human
arm, makes a practical method to the navigation of redundant manipulator robots. In
this method, the control of every link is independent from the degree of freedom of
robot; the number of input and output signals are constant. Fuzzy controller
system used in this research is a combination of three fuzzy controllers, 
which deals with a separate behavior of redundant robot. The main
objective is still to avoid the obstacles and flexion and extension of arm. The final
behavior of redundant robot is a combination of these behaviors. For illustration, some simulation results of redundant planar manipulator moving in an unknown
environment is presented. Results were prepared by a Simulink model containing
fuzzy control subsystems, sensor, actuators, and obstacles. The simulation and
experimental results of three and six link planar manipulators in environment with
one obstacle and without obstacle show a good and promising performance of the
robot.

