 Background Although undernutrition in children is widely
                            recognized as a major health problem in Tanzania, region-specific
                            prevalence data remain scarce. The objective of the present study was to
                            determine the prevalence of stunting and thinness among
                            primary-school-aged children in a village in the Arusha region in
                            Tanzania, with the aim of developing a targeted nutritional support
                            program. Methods In the present school-based cross-sectional study,
                            anthropometric measurements were obtained for all children (n = 1,379)
                            who attended Baraa primary school in the Baraa village located at the
                            transition between a rural and urban area in the Arusha region. The data
                            were compared with the world health organization (WHO) 2007 growth
                            reference data for individuals between the ages of 5 to 19. Continuous
                            variables were compared using the t-test, while categorical variables
                            were compared using Pearson’s chi-square test. Spearman’s correlation
                            and χ<sup>2</sup> for trend were used to compare the trend
                            of continuous and categorical variables, respectively. Results Basic
                            anthropometric values of the study participants were significantly lower
                            than those of the reference population. The mean values of z-scores
                            significantly differed from zero. No gender differences in the
                            prevalence of stunting and thinness were found. Three hundred and
                            twenty-six children (23.7%) suffered from at least one form of
                            undernutrition: 225 (16.3%) were stunted while 156 (11.3%) were thin.
                            The prevalence of both stunting and thinness was at its lowest in the
                            youngest children (5 - 9 years) and highest in the oldest children (14 -
                            19 years). Furthermore, 54 (16.5%) of the undernourished children
                            suffered from multiple forms of undernutrition. Conclusions
                            Undernutrition remains prevalent among primary-school-aged children in
                            the Arusha region, Tanzania. Moreover, a high proportion of children
                            suffer from a combination of different forms of undernutrition, with an
                            increase in the prevalence of undernutrition with age. 
