Corruption in administrative system in most of the countries has caused serious damages to the development and advancement and in the developing countries its importance and controlling is perfectly revealed and cleared for its people and politicians as a result, fighting against administrative corruption is a necessity to prevent the escalation of damage in the future. The present research is intended to determine the inter-organizational factors effect extent (amount of salary and wages of staff, expertise, skills and awareness of managers, personal and moral characteristics of the personnel, supervision and control of inspectors, quality and quantity of rules and regulations) on generation of corruption in the banks. The objective of this research is to achieve the real cognition of the roots and important causes of administrative corruption divulge in order to prepare the necessary grounds for reduction of administrative corruption. The research method is descriptive and the type of survey and sampling method is clustering, the statistical society includes managers and BA grade and MA grade and higher personnel of Bank Refah of Isfahan Province to the number 330 individuals whom among them 164 individuals have been selected as subjects. Information collection tool was a questionnaire containing 35 questions which for its validity the viewpoints of bank experts and supervisors and advisors have been used. To ensure of its validity and stability Cronbach alpha method has been used. Stability of the questionnaire has been got as 881.0, the collected information have been analyzed using the SPSS software and at two levels of descriptive statistics and inferential statistics. At the level of inferential statistics, one variable t-tests, multivariate analysis of Manoa, Isd test,   pair sample t-test and Hotelling’s t-test have been utilized.  The findings of the research indicated that the improvement of factors such as salary and wages, personnel moral characteristics, managers’ expertise and awareness, supervision and inspection and laws and regulations on reduction of the administrative corruption are effective.  On the basis of the witnessed findings at the level of p 0.05 has been significant; therefore, there is a difference among factors effecting administrative corruption generation which among factors affecting on the administrative corruption maximum, effect is related to the salary and wages of the personnel and the minimum effect is related to the quality and quantity of the regulations. 
