One of the unique characteristics of human is his enjoyment of thinking talent. Thinking style is the preferred mode of thinking and it indicates the manner of using potential and hidden capabilities in humans. The process of using such capabilities is called thinking style. Scholars believe that thinking styles are as the origin and education ground of effectiveness in the individuals. The goal of the present research is to study the relation between thinking styles (executive, judgmental and legislating) and efficiency of the personnel of Pakbad Company. The present research is of applied type with respect to objective and it is of correlation researches type with respect to data processing procedure. Statistical population of this research includes all personnel of Pakbad Company including 157 employees out of whom 113 employees were selected as statistical samples through simple random sampling method. In order to collect data, two questionnaires including Sternberg and Wagner's thinking style questionnaire (1991) with 24 questions and manpower efficiency questionnaire based on Achio model with 26 questions were used. Reliability factors for the first and second questionnaires were specified at 93% and 87%, respectively based on Cronbach's alpha. Moreover, formal and content validity of both questionnaires were confirmed by the specialists. The collected data was analyzed by using descriptive statistics (frequency, mean and standard deviation) and inferential statistics (Pierson correlation factor test, linear and multivariate tests and ANOVA). The obtained results indicated that there is a positive and significant relation between thinking styles and efficiency (r = 0.546  P < 0.0001). Moreover, a positive and significant relation was observed between judgment and legislating thinking styles (except for executive thinking style). Moreover, considering the value of determination coefficient (RS), it was specified that 41.7% of the efficiency variance can be explained by their judgment and legislating thinking styles.
