Background: Annually, Children as a major group have affected in disasters all over the world. As resilience terminology has been appeared in disaster risk reduction to improve more attention on human ability instead of concentration on his vulnerability. It seems that child resiliency may be the best approach to decrease their vulnerability. Although there are lot studies on resiliency, child resiliency in disaster situation seems is unique filed that would be considered. The objective of this systematic review is synthesizing the evidence of the children resiliency indicators in natural disasters to identifying their capacity and improving their ability against the disaster consequences.

Materials and Methods: This study will conduct a systematic review of the children resiliency in natural disaster situation in any mythological designed articles that extract indicators/factors to improve children resiliency in every natural disaster. Four main electronic databases which cover this topic&rsquo;s article will searched including PUBMED, SCOPUS, WEB OF SCIENCE, and PYCINFO. Furthermore, experts will be asked to identify verifiable Grey literature documents. EndNote software version X7 will use to managing search library, screening duplication and extracting irrelevant articles. Search strategy has defined by author&rsquo;s team agreement. Specific syntax has been used for each main database. It&lsquo;s considered the time duration for database searching. Articles evaluation will be based on PICO that will define according the research question for including and excluding articles. Moreover, the QARI checklist/tool from JBI (Joanna Briggs Institute Reviewers&rsquo; Manual: 2014 edition) will be used for assessing criteria quality. it is quality context and focused on human psychosocial behavior with specific group that call children , adolescence, teenager and youth but we call them under eighteen-year olds children according UNICEF definition. On the other hand, we will use the QARI data extraction tool according our research question, too.

Results: This systematic literature review will determine tangible criteria of child resiliency that would be valuable for decision makers, community, researchers, family and who are concerned about children and also disaster situations. It&rsquo;s worth to clarify this subjective term to objective for being tangible for them. In this way, in disaster situation they could evaluate the difference between having resilient child VS not resilient one, the effects are not only during disaster but also long time after disaster.

