 Background The Trans theoretical model (TTM) is developed as a
                            framework for understanding the process of behavior changes. It is known
                            as the most popular approach for promoting exercise behavior. The main
                            objective of this study is to determine the relationship between regular
                            physical activity and TTM components among members of municipality
                            councils in selected districts of Tehran. Methods This
                            quasi-experimental research with non-equivalent control groups was
                            conducted as a cross-sectional study with 207 members of municipality
                            councils at districts 17 and 20 of Tehran. Data gathering instruments
                            included: demographic; physical activity stage of change; processes of
                            change (researcher-made); self-efficacy, and decisional balance
                            questionnaires. Reliability, and construct validity were evaluated
                            through appropriate statistical procedures. To analyze the data, applied
                            statistical tests such as: chi-square, regression, Pearson correlation
                            coefficient and ANOVA were performed using SPSS 22 software. Results The
                            level of physical activity of municipality council’s members were:
                            43.5%, 12.1%, and 44.4% at low, moderate, and appropriate activity
                            levels, respectively. The results showed that 18.9, 15.9, 10.1, 24.7and
                            30.4 percent of municipality council’s members were in the pre
                            contemplation, contemplation, preparation, operation and maintenance
                            stages consequently. The stages of change could predict physical
                            activity in the municipality councils (P &lt; 0.05). However, all
                            the components of this model were significantly associated with regular
                            physical activity behavior. There was a significant relationship between
                            the structures of the processes of change, benefits and barriers against
                            regular physical activity. Conclusions Although, 43.5% of municipality
                            council’s members did not have any intention of performing physical
                            activities in the next six months, it is important to them to recognize
                            the need for physical activity as the main behavior to increase physical
                            and mental health and to be in the maintenance stage of their physical
                            activity behavior. According to the most important predicting components
                            in this study, educational intervention must be focused on in order to
                            increase the effectiveness of the programs to promote municipality
                            councils’ physical activity. 
