 Background A decline in neuromuscular function can cause a
                            decrease in physical fitness in elderly women. Objective The present
                            study aimed at investigating whether whole body vibration (WBV) training
                            and creatine supplementation could affect muscle strength, mobility, and
                            balance in elderly women in short- term. Methods The participants were
                            22 healthy elderly women aged 60 to 80 years, who were randomly divided
                            into the whole-body vibration and creatine (WBV + Cr) group, whole-body
                            vibration and placebo (WBV + P) group, and control group. The whole-body
                            vibration group performed exercises for 10 days. The participants in WBV
                            + Cr group consumed 20 g oral creatine supplement per day from the first
                            to the fifth day, which was followed by consuming 5 g of creatine per
                            day for the next 5 days. To assess mobility performance, a 30-meter
                            walking and tandem gait tests were applied. Static and dynamic balance
                            were measured by Flamingo and Timed-Up and Go (TUG) tests. Muscle
                            isometric and isotonic strength were assessed by dynamometer and leg
                            extension tests. Results No significant difference was found in static
                            balance (P = 0.11), but WBV + Cr and WBV + P groups showed better
                            results in dynamic balance (P = 0.001 and P = 0.009, respectively).
                            Moreover, leg isotonic strength improved significantly in WBV + Cr and
                            WBV + P groups (P = 0.001 and P = 0.001, respectively). However, leg
                            isometric strength and 30-meter walking performance significantly
                            improved only in WBV + Cr group compared to the control group. Moreover,
                            no significant differences were observed in isometric strength of the
                            hand (P = 0.89) and tandem gait test results among the groups (P =
                            0.25). Conclusions A short-term WBV exercise improves isotonic strength
                            of the leg muscle and dynamic balance, while creatine supplementation
                            with and without WBV training increases isometric strength of the leg
                            muscle and mobility in elderly women. 
