 Background It has been suggested that weakness and asymmetry of
                            core stabilizing muscles have an important role in the development of
                            scoliosis and its complications, especially low back pain. However there
                            is insufficient data comparing symmetry and function of these muscles in
                            scoliotic patients with the normal population. Also there are only a few
                            studies assessing the relationship between the degree of spinal
                            deviation and asymmetry of core stabilizing muscles. This study
                            evaluates the thickness, symmetry, and activation of the external
                            oblique (EO), the internal oblique (IO) and the transversus abdominis
                            (TrA) muscles of patients with AIS and compares these data with a group
                            of normal adolescents. Objectives The objective of this observational
                            study was to know the asymmetry pattern of lateral abdominal muscles at
                            rest and during the abdominal drawing-in maneuver (ADiM) in adolescents
                            with idiopathic scoliosis and to compare it with a group of healthy
                            adolescents. Methods Twenty healthy adolescents and twenty patients with
                            AIS, aged 10 to 18 years, were included. The thickness of lateral
                            abdominal muscles was measured, using ultrasound, at the end of normal
                            exhalation at rest and during the abdominal drawing-in maneuver (ADiM).
                            Muscular activity was represented as absolute difference and percentage
                            change in the muscle thickness during the ADiM compared with rest.
                            Results There was no side to side asymmetry in muscle thickness at rest
                            and also during ADiM in two groups. Thickness of right EO [0.39 (0.09)
                            in the AIS group compared to 0.51 (0.12) in the normal group] and left
                            EO [0.38(0.10) in the AIS group compared to 0.50 (0.11) in the normal
                            group] at rest was higher in the normal group (P &lt; 0.05). The
                            activity of right and left EO was higher in AIS group (P &lt; 0.05).
                            There was a positive correlation between the lumbar Cobb’s angle with
                            the right and the right-to-left difference of TrA thickness during the
                            ADiM (P &lt; 0.05). In other words, the more the lumbar Cobb’s angle
                            to the right, the thicker the right TrA relative to the left TrA during
                            the ADiM. Conclusions The EO muscle was thinner and had higher activity
                            during ADiM in the AIS group. Analysis of our data showed that in the
                            AIS group the higher the lumbar spinal curve to the right, the thicker
                            the right TrA compared to the left TrA. 
