 Context The immunogenicity of the hepatitis B virus vaccine is
                            reduced in patients with renal failure compared with the non-uraemic
                            population. A variety of approaches have been suggested to improve the
                            immune response in uraemic population including an increase in dose of
                            the hepatitis B vaccine. Objective To compare the efficacy and safety of
                            hepatitis B vaccine schedules based on greater versus standard doses of
                            HB vaccine in patients with chronic kidney disease stages 3 - 5.
                            Evidence Acquisition We carried out a systematic review of the medical
                            literature with a meta-analysis of randomized trials comparing
                            seroprotection rates after greater vs. standard doses of the HB vaccine.
                            The odds ratio to obtain seroprotection among patients who received
                            greater (study group) vs. standard (control group) doses was the
                            end-point of interest. We used a random-effects approach, as described
                            by DerSimonian and Laird, with heterogeneity and subgroup analyses.
                            Results We retrieved 11 clinical trials (n = 870 unique patients); 2 (n
                            = 141 patients) and 8 studies (n = 689) included CKD patients on
                            pre-dialysis and dialysis stage, respectively. Three trials (n = 368
                            patients) employed plasma-derived vaccine; 8 (n = 502) adopted
                            recombinant vaccine. Aggregation of study results (n = 10 studies)
                            showed that the seroprotection rate (short-term follow-up) towards HB
                            virus was higher among patients receiving greater than standard doses of
                            vaccine [pooled OR, 2.10, 95% confidence intervals, 1.15 - 3.82]. The
                            P-value was 0.0001 for our test to study heterogeneity. The
                            seroprotection rate towards HBV was much greater in the subset of trials
                            (n = 2) based on plasma-derived vaccine (OR, 3.78; 95% CI, 2.35; 6.07),
                            and no heterogeneity was found (NS). In the subset of RCTs (n = 8
                            studies), the seroprotection rate was higher among patients receiving
                            greater doses of vaccine towards HBV, OR, 2.01 (95% CI, 0.92; 4.39),
                            with significant heterogeneity (P = 0.002). Tolerance was satisfactory
                            and no dropouts due to side effects were reported. Conclusions Vaccine
                            schedules based on greater than standard doses of HB vaccine offer
                            higher immunogenicity in patients with chronic kidney disease. These
                            results support the current recommendations to give higher doses of HBV
                            vaccine to susceptible dialysis population in order to increase the
                            sero-protection rate. Further research is needed to assess whether these
                            findings apply to HB vaccines provided with novel adjuvants. 
