 Background The sharing of syringes by people who inject drugs
                            (PWID) is an important factor for the transmission of HIV. Needle and
                            syringe programs (NSP) are widely used to reduce any harm associated
                            with drug injection, however since the impact of these programs have not
                            been systematically studied our objective is to model the impact of NSPs
                            on HIV incidences for PWID in Kermanshah, Iran. Objectives The aim of
                            this study was to determine the effectiveness of NSP coverage in
                            prevention of HIV incidence among PWIDs. Patients and Methods We used
                            Wilson et al.’s mathematical model to predict the occurrence of HIV
                            amongst PWID with sufficient and insufficient client-level coverage of
                            NSPs. We parameterized and calibrated the model using behavioral and
                            epidemiological data collected in an empirical study of 470 active PWID
                            and recruited them through two Drop-In Centers (DIC) in Kermanshah, Iran
                            from April to September, 2014. Other parameters such as risk of HIV
                            transmission through injection with a shared injection, and
                            effectiveness of syringe cleaning were obtained from the literature. We
                            applied Monte Carlo simulation (10,000 runs) to capture the uncertainty
                            (simulation interval – SI) in the model’s output. Results Given the
                            output of the model, we found that among the PWID with sufficient
                            coverage of NSPs the HIV rate is 1.02%, while those with insufficient
                            coverage is increased to 4.04% (risk different = 3%, SI 95% 2.7 - 3.4%).
                            By reducing the percentage of sharing from 18% (in patients with
                            insufficient NSPs coverage) to 10%, the HIV incidence will be Dropped to
                            0.9% (SI 95%, 0.4 - 1.3%). Conclusions We found a large impact due to
                            NSPs for reducing the occurance of HIV among active drug injectors who
                            have been provided sufficient needles and syringes. The coverage of NSPs
                            needs to be increased to observe such significant impact. 
