Introduction: Product line design is a critical task that may determine a firm &apos;s survival. Producers need to constantly evolve in response to market and technology changes. As a result, the determining optimal diversity has attracted considerable attention in the marketing literature. So, all optimization approaches that have been applied to the optimal product line design problem aim at finding a better approximation of the global optimal solution that this paper solved the optimal diversity problem for brands with the use of a new population-based optimization algorithm called Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO). PSO is a nature-inspired intelligence technique, which has displayed high performance in providing a wide variety of good near-optimal solutions in optimization problems of high complexity.
Materials and Methods: In this article, diversity and prices of selected brands on the market Mashhad cheese product using Noshad project data and Pegah Milk Industry (including 435 Grocery Store) using seemingly unrelated regression model and particle swarm optimization algorithm were reviewed and analyzed and optimized in 2014. The objective function is the sum of market shares (Kalleh, Pegah and Sabah). Constrain is share total of available brands in the market which is equal to one. The parameters used in this study, with population size 50 and individual and social learning rate is 2
 Results and Discussion: Results showed that the effect the price on share of Kalleh is positive. In addition, Kalleh brand diversity have been a significant positive impact on share brand of Kalleh but with the Pegah and Sabah brand diversity have been negative relationship (statistically meaningless). The impact Pegah price is negative on the share of Pegah brand so Pegah price has a positive relationship with the price of Kalleh. With rising price of Sabah increase Pegah brand share. And diversity of Kalleh is negative and significant. Diversity of sabah brand is negative and non-significant. The effect of price on share of Pegah brand is negative and non-significant. The coefficient of Sabah brand diversity have been positive and significant relationship with Sabah brand share in the market but Kalleh brand diversity on customers buying of Sabah has a significant and positive impact. The optimum level of diversification cheese brands of Kalleh, Pegah and Sabah respectively, 8, 5 and 3 obtained which it shows that the optimum level of Kalleh cheese brand diversity in the market is more than the other rival brands. The average price of cheese brand product diversity of Kalleh, Pegah and Sabah are 45696, 34626 and 30678 (rials) respectively and it suggests that the Kalleh brand price should be higher than the other competitors. After that, brand price have been Pegah and Sabah. Kalleh brand has maximum diversity, the optimum value diversity in this study still is 8 .Also, Pegah are optimized for these state and the optimum value is obtained 5 for Pegah in the market. In other words, the number required Kalleh and Pegah cheese brand is optimized in the market. The maximum of Sabah diversity is 4 which the optimal level of Sabah diversity should be reduced to 3. In the summery, results showed that the optimum level particle swarm optimization algorithm of cheese product diversity of Kalleh brand in the market is more than other rival brands. As well as, 1 type of cheese products Sabah brand should be removed in the market and Kalleh and Pegah brands are in optimal state from the terms of cheese product diversity.
Conclusion: According to the findings is suggested, Kalleh brand price is more than other competitors brands. The results also showed that grocery stores should have been more than Pegah and kalleh brand diversity to increase profits. Kalleh brand diversity lead to more profitability than other types of brands in the optimized state. One of the main reasons that the Kalleh brand has a special share in this market is its diversity. Optimum profit from their grocery stores showed that the optimal value of kalleh and Pegah diversity is caused to increase profitability in grocery stores. Kalleh cheese price is also more than other competitors because of the quality and products diversity could have been. Brands must be paid attention to the issue of diversity products of Cheese to increase their shares. Cheese product of brands must be investigated to packaging and processing, and other diversity of brands features to increase share and profit in the market.
