 Background Various studies in Iran on the role of BMI higher than
                            normal (BMI ≥25) on breast cancer have reported different results.
                            Objective The aim of this systematic review and meta-analysis is to
                            estimate the odds ratio of overweightness and obesity as risk factors of
                            breast cancer in studies conducted in Iran. Evidence Acquisition The
                            following main databases were searched from 2004 to 2014 to find related
                            articles: PubMed, Web of Science, Google Scholar, Scopus and Iranian
                            databases (SID and Magiran), breast cancer conferences held in Iran, key
                            journals, and the references of the selected articles. Keywords were:
                            Cancer, Tumor, Neoplasm, Neoplasia, Carcinoma, Malignancy, Malignant,
                            Benign. The combination with OR and added it to search field with AND to
                            words such as Iran and breast was used as the search strategy. The
                            observational studies (cohort, case-control, and cross-sectional) in
                            Iran that had reported the relation between BMI and breast cancer in
                            Persian and English were searched. There were no limitations in terms of
                            age, race, ethnicity, and marital status for women. The exposure was BMI
                            ≥ 25 (overweight and obese) and the outcome was breast cancer with
                            pathological confirmation. Two reviewers separately used the STROBE
                            checklist for quality assessment, critically appraised papers and
                            extract the data. The overall estimate was the odds ratio. Results Of
                            4396 studies, after evaluation of heterogeneity, 7 case-control studies
                            with a sample size of 33552 were included in the meta-analysis. A
                            significant relation was observed between obesity (OR = 1.81, 95% CI =
                            1.24 - 2.64) and odds of breast cancer. A significant relation was also
                            observed between overweightness and odds of breast cancer (OR = 1.46,
                            95% CI = 1.13 - 1.89). Conclusions Meta-analysis results showed a
                            significant relation between obesity and overweight with risk of breast
                            cancer in Iranian women. We recommended Iranian women to be aware of the
                            effect of weight on breast cancer and encouraged them to decrease their
                            weight via physical activity and diet control. 
