Introduction: Anxiety disorders are among major problems for humanity, often due to imbalance in the activity of brain monoaminergic systems. clinical evidence indicates the possible disorder of Serotonergic neurons in the pathophysiology of anxiety, therefore, in the present study, Fluoxetine and Cyproheptadine drugs were used as modifiers of serotonin levels in the brain, to evaluate the role of Serotonergic system in the development or alleviation of anxiety- like disorders.
Objective: This study aims to investigate the role of serotonergic system in anxiety- like behavior changes and thyroid hormones metabolic changes in male rats under immobilization stress.
Materials and Methods: 30 male adult wistar rats, weighing 180±20 g, were randomly divided into five groups of 6. immobilization stress was induced in the rats by limiting polyethylene, and anxiolytic evaluation of the effects of drugs in the treated groups was performed using the elevated plus-maze test. In this study, fluoxetine with concentration of 20 mg/kg and cyproheptadine with concentration of 4 mg/kg were intraperitoneally administered to the animals. at the end of the treatment period, effects of drugs on anxiety like behavior of immobilization stress-induced and thyroid hormones serum levels were measured using an ELISA kit. The data were analyzed at a significance level of p < 0.05 using one-way ANOVA, and tukey's post hoc test
Results: The results of the plus-maze test showed that the percentage of time spent in the open arms in the stress group was significantly decreased, compared with the control group (p < 0.001). the administration of fluoxetine or cyproheptadine under immobilization stress on the animals leads to a decrease in this indicator, compared to that in the control group (p < 0.001). the immobilization stress in animals under stress serum concentrations of T3 and T4, compared to the control animals, increased (p < 0.001), while administration of such medications restored somehow this index to that in the controls .
Conclusion: The results indicate the improving effects of serotonergic system in the control of anxiety- like behavior and thyroid hormones secretion 
Conflict of Interest: none Declared

