Justice in many studies has been introduced as a variable that prepares the ground for inhibition of deviant behaviors. Nevertheless, the findings of various studies conducted on this issues show that the obtained results are sometimes inconsistent with each other. Therefore, the present research was conducted with the objective of studying the moderating role of five cultural values, including, power distance, uncertainty avoidance, masculinity/femininity, collectivism/individualism and work dynamic on the relationship between perceived justice and deviant behaviors. The research sample consisted of 288 respondents who were selected through convenience sampling technique. Research instruments included Cultural Values Questionnaire, Perceived Justice Questionnaire and Deviant Behaviors Questionnaire. Hierarchical regression analysis was employed to analyze the garnered data. The results indicated that in high masculinity/femininity and power distance there is a positive significant relationship between distributive justice and deviant behaviors toward the organization, and in high masculinity/femininity, there is a positive significant relationship between distributive justice and deviant behaviors toward individuals. In low work dynamic compared to high work dynamic, there is a stronger relationship between procedural justice and deviant behaviors toward the organization. Also in low uncertainty avoidance, there is a positive significant relationship between procedural justice and deviant behaviors toward individuals, and in low masculinity/femininity there is a negative significant relationship between procedural justice and deviant behaviors toward individuals, but in high masculinity/femininity there is a positive significant relationship between procedural justice and deviant behaviors toward individuals.. The results of this study showed that the cultural values can affect the normal relations between perceived fairness and deviant behaviors. The findings of the present study are highly important for future research and theorizing in Iran.
