Introduction: Health workers are under the influence of many stressful occupational factors. This tension in the nursing profession is more than other health care occupations. Nursing is a challenging profession due to emotional demands due to the involvement of work-related emotions and the hard working conditions, including overload work, personal conflicts, lack of spiritual support, and the physical, organizational, and psychosocial working conditions associated hardships. One of the most important human abilities that helps effective adaptation to risk factors, including psychosocial stressors, is the resiliency.
Objective: Determining the effect of resiliency skills education on job satisfaction components of psychosocial working conditions in nursing personnel of Shafa hospital in Rasht.
Materials and Methods: This study was experimental with a pre-test, a post-test and one control group. Eighty nursing personnel from Shafa Hospital in Rash were recruited and randomly assigned to experimental and control groups. The experimental group received a “resiliency skills training course” in 10 sessions of 45 minutes each, but the control group went through its routine program. Data were collected using Demographic information and Copenhagen Psychosocial Questionnaire (COPSOQ). The data were analyzed using Wilcoxon test in SPSS v.22.
Results: Results showed no difference between the two group of intervention and control in terms of demographic characteristics. Results revealed that the resiliency skills training could change job satisfaction components of psychosocial working conditions. While the rate of variability job satisfaction components of psychosocial working conditions (job type and the future of the job) in nursing personnel improved significantly in experimental group than that in control group (p?0/05).
Conclusion: Accordingly, we can conclude that the resiliency skills training could promote job satisfaction components of psychosocial working conditions in nursing personnel.
Therefore, it is recommended that training be included in the nurse's in-service training program. 
Conflict of interest: non declared

