Background and Objectives: Boron is one of two nonmetal micronutrients. Total boron concentration in soils varies between 2 and 200 mg Kg-1 and frequently ranges from 7 to 80 
mg Kg-1. Less than 5% of total soil boron is plant available. The primary function of boron is in plant cell wall structural integrity. Boron is important for cell expansion, regulation of H+ transport, retention of cellular Ca+2 and control of lignin production following cell expansion. Cell wall stability is especially important during pollen tube growth that is essential for seed development. Adequate boron increases flower production and retention and seed and fruit development. Boron deficiency often occurs with  <  20 mg Kg-1 in mature leaf tissue of most crops. Boron toxicity to plants is uncommon in most arable soils unless it has been added in excessive amounts in fertilizers. When Calcium availability is high, plants can tolerate higher boron availability. Under low Calcium supply, many crops exhibit lower boron tolerance. High solution Ca+2 protects crops from excess boron. The Ca:B ratio in leaf tissues has been used to assess boron status of crops, where boron deficiency for most crops is likely when Ca:B ratio is greater than 1200:1. The major objective of this study is to assess the effect of Ca:B ratios on the yield and absorption of essential nutrients on crops which have not been practiced extensively, particularly on wheat that planting on large areas. 
Materials and Methods: In the present study, the effect of various Ca:B ratios on wheat yield and nutrients acquisitions was investigated. The experiment was laid out in a randomized complete block design with 6 treatments and 4 replications, in a greenhouse. Different Ca:B ratios were, 2000:1, 1000:1, 500:1, 250:1, 125:1 and 25:1. In each pot, 20 seeds were planted in a sand and perlite culture. The essential nutrients were applied through Hoagland solution.
Results: The results showed that the plant dry matter content increases with decreased Ca:B ratios and the adverse effect of boron decreases with increasing calcium concentration. phosphorous, potassium, magnesium, boron and sodium contents in the plant were significantly increased with decreasing Ca:B ratios in solution culture. There were inverse relationships among the Ca:B ratios and other nutrients.
Conclusion: Therefore, due to the boron importance in flower production and seed development and because of the narrow range between boron deficiency and toxicity levels, the Ca:B ratio should be adequately considered when boron is applied.

