<strong > Introduction </strong >
 Anaerobic digestion (AD) is a process of breaking down organic matter, such as manure, in the absence of oxygen by concerted action of various groups of anaerobic bacteria. The AD process generates biogas, an important renewable energy source that is composed mostly of methane (CH4), and carbon dioxide (CO2) which can be used as an energy source. Biogas originates from biogenic material and is therefore a type of biofuel. Enhancement of biogas production from cattle dung or animal wastes by co-digesting with crop residues like sugarcane stalk, maize stalks, rice straw, cotton stalks, wheat straw, water hyacinth, onion waste and oil palm fronds  as well as with liquid waste effluent such as palm oil mill effluent. Nevertheless, the search for cost effective and environmentally friendly methods of enhancing biogas generation (i.e. biogas yield) still needs to be further investigated. Many workers have studied the reaction kinetics of biogas production and developed kinetic models for the anaerobic digestion process. Objective of this study is to investigate the effect of biological additive using of organic loading rate (OLR) in biogas production from cow dung. In addition, cumulative biogas production was simulated using logistic growth model, and modified Gompertz models, respectively.
 <strong >Materials and Methods </strong >
The study was performed in 2015-2016 at the agricultural research center of Ardabil Province, Moghan (39.39 °N, 48.88° E). Fresh cow manure used for this research was collected from the research farm of the Institute for Animal Breeding and Animal Husbandry, Moghan.  It was kept in 30 l containers at ambient temperature until fed to the reactors. In this study, experiments were conducted to investigate the biogas production from anaerobic digestion of cow manure (CM) with effect of organic loading rate (OLR) at mesophilic temperature (35°C±2) in a long time experiment with completely stirred tank reactor (CSTR) under semi continuously feeding. The complete-mix, pilot-scale digester with working volume of 180 l operated at different organic feeding rates of 2 and 3 kg VS. (m-3.d-1). the biogas produced was measured daily by water displacement method and its composition was measured by gas chromatograph. Total solids (TS), volatile solids (VS), pH and etc. were determined according to the APHA Standard Methods. The biogas production kinetics for the description and evaluation of methanogens was carried out by fitting the experimental data of biogas production to various kinetic equations. In addition, Specific cumulative biogas production was simulated using logistic kinetic model exponential Rise to Maximum and modified Gompertz kinetic model. 
 <strong >Results and Discussion </strong >
The experimental protocol was defined to examine the effect of the change in the organic loading rate on the efficiency of biogas production and to report on its steady-state performance. The biogas produced had methane composition of 58- 62% and biogas production efficiency 0.204 and 0.242 m3 biogas (kg VS input) for 2 and 3 kg VS.(m-3.d-1), respectively. The reactor showed stable performance with VS reduction of around 64 and 53% during loading rate of 2 and 3 kg VS.(m-3.d-1), respectively. Other studies showed similar results. Modified Gompertz and logistic plot equation was employed to model the biogas production at different organic feeding rates. The equation gave a good approximation of the biogas yield potential (P) and correlation coefficient (R2) over 0.99.
 <strong >Conclusions </strong >
The performance of anaerobic digestion of cow dung for biogas production using a completely stirred tank reactor was successfully examined with two different organic loading rate (OLR) under semi continuously feeding regime in mesophilic temperature range at (35°C±2). The methane content of 58- 62% and actual biogas yield of 0.204 and 0.242 m3 biogas.(kg VS input-1) were observed for 2 and 3 kg VS. (m-3.d-1), respectively. The modeling results suggested Modified Gompertz plot and Logistic growth plot both had higher correlation for simulating cumulative biogas production. Therefore, arising from the increasing environmental concern and prevailing wastes management crises, optimizing biogas production by 2 kg VS. (m-3.d-1) represents a viable and sustainable energy option.
