Introduction: Contaminated raw vegetables play an important role in the distribution of the parasitic infections. Parasitic contamination of vegetables may occur during the cultivation or marketing process. Identifying the rate and type of parasites transmitted by vegetables has public health impact on the population.
Objective: This study aimed to determine the rate and type of parasitic contamination of the market vegetables in the city of Rasht, northern Iran. 
Materials and Methods: This analytical-descriptive study was conducted on 342 samples from 12 types of fresh vegetables. They were washed with water containing detergent and centrifuged. The sediments were microscopically examined for parasitic contamination by direct method. The collected data were analyzed by SPSS.21 using Chi Square and Fisher’s Exact Test.
Results: Human pathogenic parasites were identified in (4.1%) of the specimens. In general, (5.3%) of the vegetables were contaminated with both pathogenic and commensal organisms. Parasitic contaminations were identified on vegetables such as Coriander, Water cress, Parsley, Mint, Choochagh (Eryngium planum), Khaliwash (Ziziphora tenuior). Locally grown vegetables were significantly more contaminated than those grown out of Guilan Province (P  <  0.006). Six species of pathogenic helminthes (eg., Hook Worm, Toxocara spp., Trichostrongylus spp., Trichuris spp., Strongyloides spp, Diploscapter spp.), two kinds of Free-living amoeba (Acanthamoeba spp. and Naegleria spp.) and also three kinds of protozoan commensal organisms (eg., Entamoeba. coli, Endolimax nana, Entamoeba spp ) of human gastrointestinal tract were identified. Among the tested vegetables, Choochaq (Eryngium planum) had the highest rate of parasitic contamination. Although vegetable contamination in warm seasons was more prevalent, the seasonal difference was not statistically significant (P  <  0.133). Numerous types of Free-living nematodes' eggs , larval and adult stages were found in 65.8 % of the tested vegetables.
Conclusion: Few protozoan and helminthes were detected in the examined vegetables. Local vegetables were more contaminated than those from out of province. In this study, the rate of vegetable parasitic contamination was lower than expected. However, in order to prevent the parasitic infections, more attention and care during washing the vegetables particularly local ones is recommended.
Conflict of interest: non declared

