The emergence of the entrepreneurial university as an objective relationship between industry and academia, offers new horizons of employment and entrepreneurship on a large scale to decision makers, planners and university administrators. The aim of this study was to assess the entrepreneurial capacity of the University of Tehran based on the Gibb model 2012.
The present descriptive research was conducted via a survey. The population of this research was 299 faculty members of the faculties of Engineering, Management and Entrepreneurship of the University of Tehran, and 271 respondents completed the questionnaires. The University Entrepreneurial Scorecard of Gibb (2012) was used for data collection, and data analysis was conducted using the SPSS software.
The results indicate that the components of the entrepreneurial university including: concept  vision, mission strategy, governance, organisation design, multidiscipline transdiscipline, leverage, public value and stakeholder engagement, alumni, knowledge transfer, incubation, across all departmenta spin offs venture funding were relatively good. However, internationalisation and enterprise entrepreneurship education were in unfavourable condition.
The results show that the overall situation of indicators of entrepreneurial university based on the Gibb model at the University of  Tehran was at a relatively good level. According to comments of faculty members of the University of Tehran, it can be concluded that the components of concept vision, mission strategy, governance, organisation design, multidiscipline transdiscipline, leverage, public value and stakeholder engagement, alumni, knowledge transfer, incubation, across all departmenta spin offs venture funding were relatively good. Nevertheless, internationalisation and enterprise entrepreneurship education were in unfavourable condition. According to the results obtained from the indicators of entrepreneurial university, indicator of across all departmenta spin offs venture funding has the greatest impact on the development of the University of Tehran as a entrepreneurial university

