Objective: There are numerous strategies to prevent hepatotoxicity caused by doxorubicin therapy. These strategies include exercise as well as herbal antioxidants such as curcumin to reduce the toxic effects of doxorubicin. This study aims to evaluate the effects of six weeks of continuous training with and without nanocurcumin supplementation on doxorubicin-induced hepatotoxicity in an aging rat model.
Methods: We randomly divided 42 Wistar male rats into 7 groups: control saline, control doxorubicin, nanocurcumin + doxorubicin, nanocurcumin + saline, continuous training + doxorubicin, continuous training + saline, and continuous training + nanocurcumin + doxorubicin. The rats received intraperitoneal injections of D-galactose (100 mg/kg) to induce ageing. The training groups ran on a treadmill for six weeks, five days per week with a gradual increase from 25 min/day to 54 min/day at a velocity of 15 m/min to 20 m/min. In the last fifteenth days, rats scheduled to received doxorubicin had a cumulative dose of 15 mg/kg of body weight (daily: 1 ml/kg). Nanocurcumin supplement (daily: 100 mg/kg body weight) was administered to the respective groups. Assessment and analysis were conducted after homogenization of the liver tissue biopsy.
Results: Doxorubicin caused a significant decrease in glutathione peroxidase and a slight increase in malondialdehyde in the liver. On the other hand, continuous training with doxorubicin treatment prevented the decrease of glutathione peroxidase and increase in malondialdehyde in the liver that was caused by doxorubicin. Also, six weeks of continuous training with nanocurcumin supplementation caused a significant decrease in malondialdehyde and increased glutathione peroxidase in the liver compared to the control doxorubicin group.
Conclusion: Based on the results, the combination of nanocurcumin supplementation and continuous training in the doxorubicin-induced aging rat model have led to a precautionary effect and up-regulation of antioxidant defense. Continuous training appeared to have more beneficial effects than nanocurcumin supplementation in reducing doxorubicin-induced hepatotoxicity.
