Background and Objective: Increased oxidative damage to DNA can be mentioned as the main cause of age-related diseases. This damage can result in translation of specific genes which regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of a regular swimming training with garlic extract on the levels of Bax and Bcl-2 in the liver tissue doxorubicin -induced aging rat

Materials and Methods: In this study, 42 aged male rats, 40-50 weeks, with an average initial weight of 250-300 g were randomly divided into 6 groups: 1. control, 2. saline, 3. doxorubicin, 4. doxorubicin+exercise, 5. doxorubicin+garlic, and 6. doxorubicin+garlic+exercise. Chronic kidney disease (CKD) was induced by injection of 8.5 ml/kg of doxorubicin. The animals in the exercise groups were forced to swim 30 min once a day, 3 days per week, for 8 weeks. Groups receiving supplement and exercise + supplement, daily treated with 1 ml of garlic extract per kilogram of body weight for 8 weeks orally (gavage). In addition, 48 hours after the last training session and after 12-10 hours of fasting, rats were anesthetized and liver tissue separated immediately and stored at -70?C to measure the levels of Bax and Bcl-2. For comparisons among the groups, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey’s test were performed with P < 0.05 as an indication of statistical significance.

Results: The findings showed that eight weeks of swimming training and garlic extract and the combination of exercise training and garlic extract resulted in a significant increase in the levels of Bcl-2 and also a significant decrease in the levels of Bax and Bax/Bcl-2 in the kidney tissue of aged rats induced by doxorubicin (P < 0.05).

Conclusion: Exercise training, herbal supplement of garlic, and a combination of these two methods can be as an effective non-pharmacological therapy to reduce liver damage and protect liver tissue against oxidative stress and inflammatory injuries associated with aging.

