 Background In the world, it is estimated that 36.9 million people
                            are living with HIV (PLHIV). Tuberculosis (TB) remains as the leading
                            cause of death among PLHIV. This study aimed to determine the predictors
                            of TB among HIV positive patients. Methods This cross-sectional study
                            was based on the data from 366 patients with HIV/AIDS acquired from 2010
                            to 2013 in Abadan and Khorramshahr cities, southwest of Iran.
                            Demographic and clinical data were obtained from patients’ medical
                            records in Abadan and Khorramshahr triangular clinics. Univariate and
                            multivariable binary logistic regression models were used to identify TB
                            predictors among HIV/AIDS patients. Results The prevalence of TB
                            patients was 21.9% among HIV patients. About 57.4% of the patients were
                            below 35 years of age, and most of them (85.5%) were male. Univariate
                            logistic regression showed a statistically significant association
                            between the occurrence of TB and explanatory variables including sex,
                            imprisonment history, HCV and HBV status, addiction, stage of disease,
                            CD4 cell and TLC (Total lymphocyte count) count. In multivariate
                            analysis, being addicted (adjusted OR = 7.03, 95% CI: 1.28, 38.66) and
                            positive HBV (adjusted OR = 4.28, 95% CI: 1.53, 12.00) were associated
                            with incidence of TB after adjusting for age, sex, phase at diagnosis,
                            addiction and HBV status. Conclusions Addiction and HBV infection can be
                            considered as predictors of incidence of TB in HIV/AIDS patients then
                            early diagnosis of TB especially in higher-risk groups, such as those
                            with addiction and HBV infection is recommended. 
