 Objective Lymphatic spread is a common feature of ovarian cancer
                            both in early and advanced stages of the disease. There is also a
                            controversial problem of the impact of para-aortic lymph node dissection
                            between gynecologist oncologist experts. The aim of this study is
                            evaluating the effect of Para aortic Lymph node dissection in ovarian
                            cancer patients. Methods This descriptive cross-sectional study was
                            performed on 100 ovarian cancer patients admitted in department of
                            gynecology oncology of Ghaem hospital, Mashhad University of Medical
                            Sciences, Iran, from November 2013 - 2014. All patients underwent
                            surgical staging surgery and optimal debulking surgery as possible. In
                            addition, concurrent systematic pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy
                            up to the level of inferior mesenteric artery was performed. Results A
                            total of 100 patients were studied. The mean age was 47 years (SD = 13).
                            In 73 patients optimal cytoreductive surgery was done with para aortic
                            lymphadenectomy. 53 cases (72.6%) were in primary cytoreductive surgery
                            and 20 cases (27.3%) in interval debulking surgery groups. Positive
                            paraaortic lymph node in the first group was 6 cases (11.3) and in the
                            second group was 2 cases (10%). 27 patients were in apparent stage I and
                            46 patients were in stage II-III-IV of disease. We found positive
                            paraaortic lymph node in 11% of total patients. We found positive
                            paraaortic lymph node without positive pelvic lymph node in two
                            patients. Conclusions Lymph node dissection will produce a significant
                            benefit in accurate and complete surgical staging; it will reduce
                            residual disease and then progression-free survival. 
