 Background Theory-oriented interventions play a key role in
                            promoting people’s QOL and preventing the risk of immobility. Given this
                            key role and due to the critical nature of nurses’ professional duties,
                            this study was performed. Objective The study aimed to determine the
                            effect of a TTM-based intervention on level of physical activity in ICU
                            nurses working at hospitals affiliated to Guilan University of Medical
                            Sciences. Methods This randomized controlled trial first selected 82
                            nurses through the census method in order to determine their SOC, then
                            assigned 68 nurses who were in the first three stages to case and
                            control groups. Valid and reliable data collection tools were used,
                            including a demographic questionnaire and TTM constructs (SOC, GPAQ, SE,
                            DB, and POC). Path analysis of data was performed by Lisrel-8.80. The
                            inter-correlation matrix was determined within the model’s constructs
                            and between the constructs and the level of physical activity in order
                            to design and implement the intervention. Two-stage assessment was
                            performed, once immediately after the intervention and again six months
                            later. The data obtained were analyzed using appropriate statistical
                            tests and Pearson correlation coefficient. Results 82.9% of the
                            participants were in the first three stages of TTM. Immediately after
                            the intervention, 55.9% were in the preparation stage, 44.1% in the
                            pre-contemplation stage, and 76.5% in the contemplation stage. Before
                            the intervention, only 26.5% were in the preparation and 44.1% in
                            pre-contemplation stages. There was a statistically significant
                            difference (P = 0.0001) between the control and case groups immediately
                            and six months after the intervention. Conclusion TTM-based intervention
                            led to the subjects’ placement in higher levels of SOC. 
