 Background Membrane vesicles are non-viable structures released by
                            pathogenic bacteria. They contain numerous antigenic materials from the
                            bacterial outer membrane, making them attractive targets for use as
                            vaccine antigens. The membrane vesicles are related to the virulence
                            because of their capacity to concentrate immunomodulatory molecules and
                            toxins. Objective In the present study, we examined the membrane
                            vesicles of <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> as adjuvant
                            and vaccine candidate. Methods <i>Mycobacterium
                            tuberculosis</i> standard strain CRBIP7.11 was cultured at 37°C in
                            Loewenstein Johnson (LJ) media for 3-4 weeks. To confirm the species,
                            standard microbiological and biochemical tests were performed. After
                            preparation of membrane vesicles, the amount of protein in membrane
                            vesicles was measured by SDS-PAGE and Nanodrop. To analyze the integrity
                            and morphology of extracellular vesicles, transmission electron
                            microscopy was used. The lipopolysaccharide was determined using the
                            Limulus Amebocyte Lysate (LAL) kit. Results The total mass of vesicular
                            fraction was 4.8 mg. SDS-PAGE showed protein bands in the approximate
                            regions of 35, 40, 70, and 90 kDa. The amount of membrane vesicles total
                            protein was 1.26 and 1.29 mg/mL. Transmission electron microscopy
                            analysis of pellets revealed that the extracted vesicles are 50-200 nm
                            in size. Also, LaL test showed negative results (values were less than
                            300 IU). Conclusions The results of the present study give important
                            evidence that actively released mycobacterial vesicles are delivery
                            instruments for immunologically active molecules involved in
                            mycobacterial virulence. 
