 Background Despite the implementation of the national control
                            program, tuberculosis is one of the greatest health problems in Iran.
                            The prevalence of different strains in specific ethnic populations
                            suggests that <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> transmission
                            has been limited and restricted to close contact. Objectives In the
                            present review, we describe the epidemiology of tuberculosis in Iran.
                            Methods In this review article, databases including Scopus, PubMed, and
                            Google scholar were used to search for the epidemiology of tuberculosis
                            in Iran. Results Since 1996, tuberculosis incidence has been decreased
                            as the national tuberculosis control program was established in Iran.
                            However, due to the emergence of drug-resistant strains, recurrence of
                            the disease, and association of tuberculosis with HIV pandemic,
                            tuberculosis is becoming a health problem in Iran like many other parts
                            of the world. Moreover, several other factors such as poverty,
                            homelessness, inadequate access to health services, and lack of
                            infrastructure in public health play an important role in worsening the
                            situation. The distribution of the disease is not similar in all parts
                            of Iran and it is higher in the western and eastern parts than the
                            central areas. Conclusions Review of the studies revealed that levels of
                            multidrug-resistant tuberculosis among new tuberculosis patients are
                            increasing in Iran and the vaccination system needs to be reformed.
                            Because of the increasing number of patients coming from neighboring
                            countries with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, this area needs more
                            stewardship and control in order to prevent the outbreak of
                            multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. Finally, by improving the healthcare
                            system, it is trusted that a more noteworthy number of these patients
                            will be cured in Iran. 
