 Background Molecular typing techniques are reliable tools for
                            epidemiological study of tuberculosis because of their power in
                            detecting recent transmission and differentiating reinfection and
                            relapses. Objectives The present study investigated epidemiological
                            diversity among <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> strains
                            circulating in three Khorasan provinces, Iran, using 12-loci MIRU-VNTR
                            and spoligotyping. Methods This study was performed on 140 <i>M.
                            tuberculosis</i> strains selected from the sputum of new cases of
                            pulmonary tuberculosis patients in three Khorasan provinces, Iran. 12
                            loci MIRU-VNTR and Spoligotyping were performed on all isolates. Results
                            By MIRU-VNTR analysis, 76 distinct patterns comprising 19 clusters and
                            57 unique patterns were identified. Based on the results, MIRU10,
                            MIRU26, and ETRF were highly discriminative, ETRD was poorly
                            discriminative and other loci were designated as moderately
                            discriminative. Spoligotyping of isolates revealed 51 distinct patterns:
                            26 patterns containing 33 strains (23.6%) corresponding to orphan
                            strains and 14 patterns containing 107 strains (76.4%) corresponding to
                            shared-types in the SITVIT2 database. Totally, 103 isolates (73.6%) were
                            classified into 14 clusters containing 2 - 56 isolates; the remaining 37
                            isolates (26.4%) were unique patterns. By combining two techniques, 94
                            distinct patterns (15 clusters) contained 61 isolates (43.6%), and 79
                            unique patterns were identified. The discriminatory power (HGDI) of
                            combination of two techniques was 0.962, which was higher than that of
                            each technique alone. Based on the trees designed by Bionumerics
                            software, we differentiated isolates with similar genetic patterns and
                            grouped them together. Two great clusters were Haarlem and CAS lineage.
                            All strains with combined drug resistance related to Beijing strains.
                            Also, all mono drug-resistant strains related to Haarlem family; other
                            strains were susceptible to the first-line anti-tuberculosis drugs.
                            Also, homoplasy was observed in a number of patterns. Conclusions In
                            MIRU-VNTR typing method, according to the genotype of each area, the
                            loci with high discriminatory power (such as miru10, miru26, and ETRF in
                            Iran) are recommended to be used and the loci with poor discrimination
                            (such as ETRD in Iran) are not. 
