 Background Handwriting difficulties are one of the most common
                            reasons for referral to school-based occupational therapy. Assessing
                            handwriting performance using standardized tools is necessary for
                            scientific research and clinical assessment. Objectives The objective of
                            this study was to develop and validate the Persian handwriting
                            assessment tool to evaluate legibility and speed in near-point copying
                            and dictation domains in primary school-aged children. Methods This
                            methodological study was conducted in Tehran, Iran during 2015 - 2016.
                            Measurement items were selected by reviewing the past literature and
                            considering the opinions of an expert panel. The scale development, the
                            analysis of content validity, and item analysis were performed in phase
                            one using the data from 131 students in grades two and three.
                            Exploratory factor analysis and discriminant validity were analyzed in
                            phase two using the data from 208 subjects. Sampling was conducted using
                            the random cluster method. Confirmatory factor analysis was conducted on
                            a randomly split sample of half of the data. Results The content
                            validity ratio of most of the criteria was greater than 0.57. Item
                            analysis confirmed the writing assignments in the copying and dictation
                            domains. Principal component analysis revealed that measurements in the
                            copying and dictation domains loaded into three components separately,
                            which accounted for 71.96% of the variance in the copying domain and
                            70.46% of the variance in the dictation domain. Confirmatory factor
                            analysis also confirmed the accuracy of the three-dimensional structure
                            designated through exploratory factor analysis. Discriminant validity
                            showed that handwriting speed and legibility increased with maturation.
                            Conclusions The Persian handwriting assessment tool as a comprehensive
                            and quickly scored tool that can help therapists identify primary school
                            students with handwriting problems so that appropriate interventions for
                            these students can be implemented. 
