 Context Transient ischemic dilatation (TID) of the left ventricle
                            is a non-invasive marker of suspected or known Coronary Artery Disease
                            (CAD), and is used for the prediction of prognosis. Because the value of
                            TID has been emphasized by current publications in clinical nuclear
                            cardiology field, the current review of the literature was conducted to
                            present comprehensive overview on the findings in this field. Evidence
                            Acquisition Relevant literature was obtained by searching online
                            databases, including MEDLINE/PubMed, Google Scholar, and Science Direct
                            using the following keywords: transient ischemic dilation, Single Photon
                            Emission Computed Tomography Myocardial Perfusion Imaging (SPECT MPI),
                            procedural guidelines for myocardial perfusion imaging, and coronary
                            artery disease. Articles were inspected to obtain good agreement
                            criteria pertinent to the objective of the study. Overall, 21 relevant
                            articles were selected to be included in the review. Results
                            Stress-induced subendocardial hypoperfusion, post-ischemic stunning, and
                            impaired coronary flow reserve have been reported as common causes of
                            TID. Transient Ischemic Dilatation can be easily measured by available
                            automatic software on the market, including Emory Cardiac Toolbox,
                            4D-MSPECT, etc. A close correlation between TID and LV volume/function
                            has been emphasized by previous researchers. Transient Ischemic
                            Dilatation, in the setting of a cardiac SPECT MPI with abnormal
                            findings, has been known to be a robust indicator of severe/extensive
                            CAD and future cardiac events. However, only a limited number of
                            publications are available for its probable use in the setting of normal
                            MPI, especially based on patients at high-risk and those with TID.
                            Conclusions By using an upper limit value of TID that is derived
                            according to the optimum imaging procedure of a particular laboratory,
                            routine reporting of TID measurement as part of conventional SPECT MPI
                            analysis may be useful. 
