Covering models have many applications in a wide variety of real-world problems.
But some assumptions of covering models are not realistic enough. Accordingly, a
general approach would not be able to answer the needs of encountering varied aspects
of real-world considerations. Assumptions like the unavailability of servers,
uncertainty, and evaluating more factors at the same time, are assumptions with which
covering models are always faced; however, these models are not able to find any
answers for them. Therefore, how to deal with these sorts of assumptions has been
always a question. In this research, for facing unavailability and uncertainty in input
data, backup covering and interval full-ranking models are addressed, respectively.
Furthermore, by combining backup covering and interval full-ranking models (also
conceptions), not only time is saved and more factors like efficiency and cost are
simultaneously evaluated, but also covering considerations will be reachable in real
aspects.
The proposed model in this paper is searching for three assumptions to cover major
features. Emergency services are harshly sensible to delay, so the problem of server’s
unavailability should be solved by considering backup coverage. Moreover, inefficient
facilities were absolutely neglected in covering literature despite their destructive role
in serving customer demands. To overcome this problem, we have entered efficiency
to our model by considering location of each facility as an input for a revised version
of data envelopment analysis which is called full-ranking model. As many research
have proved to believe in uncertainty, no one can neglect this feature in real-world,
we have just defined data in intervals to consider this feature. In final, the evident
absence of research in three mentioned key features in one frame has left covering
literature in defect and brought about the proposed three-objective model in this paper
which is called combined maximal covering with backup model (MCBM) and interval
full-ranking.
