 Introduction Adverse patient outcomes have become a big concern in
                            the quality of healthcare. Different factors can have an impact on the
                            variety and rate of adverse patient outcomes. Objectives The present
                            study aimed at determining the rate of patient safety during events and
                            evaluating nursing workloads as well as identifying the main factors
                            that affect the incidence rate of patient safety events among nurses.
                            Methods This cross-sectional study was conducted on 293 nurses working
                            in 24 wards of Baqiyatallah hospital in Tehran, Iran, in 2016. The
                            sampling method was stratified random sampling. Data were collected
                            using a self-administered questionnaire, which was classified into 4
                            subtitles: Individual and organizational characteristics, perceived
                            subjective, objective workloads, and some patient safety events during
                            the past 6 months. Binary and multiple regressions were used to survey
                            the relationship between variables using the SPSS Version 23 software.
                            Results Bloodstream infection, pressure ulcer, and patient falls were
                            the most reported adverse outcomes during the past 6 months with 76.1%,
                            66.2%, and 59%, respectively. At least one of the 6 adverse outcomes was
                            reported by nurses within the range of 45%-77%. Of all individual
                            characteristics, the only significant relationship occurred between work
                            experience and bloodstream infection (P value = 0.28 and 0.32). No
                            significant relationship was detected between adverse patient outcomes
                            and objective workloads. Regression models revealed that the subjective
                            workload of adverse patient outcomes increased with making adjustments
                            in the individual and organizational characteristics. The incidence
                            rates of adverse outcomes were 5.69-9.78 times more than the fixed
                            shifts in all rotational shift works. Conclusions The nurses reported a
                            high incidence rate of all patient safety events, and the results
                            revealed that the objective workload could not be a predictor for
                            patient adverse events. According to the findings, subjective workload
                            and work shift were significantly related to the incidence rate of
                            adverse patient events. In conclusion, good regulation of sleep-wake
                            cycles can be an important factor for decreasing the rate of adverse
                            patient events. 
