The proposed 42-V PowerNet in automobiles requires the battery to provide a large number of shallow discharge–charge cycles at a high rate. High-rate discharge is necessary for engine cranking, while high-rate charge is associated with regenerative braking. The battery will therefore operate at these high rates in a partial-state-of-charge condition — ‘HRPSoC duty’.

Under simulated HRPSoC duty, it is found that the valve-regulated lead–acid (VRLA) battery fails prematurely due to the progressive accumulation of lead sulfate mainly on the surfaces of the negative plates. This is because the lead sulfate layer cannot be converted efficiently back to sponge lead during charging either from the engine or from the regenerative braking. Eventually, this layer of lead sulfate develops to such extent that the effective surface area of the plate is reduced markedly and the plate can no longer deliver the high-cranking current demanded by the automobile.

The objective of this study is to develop and optimize a pulse-generation technique to minimize the development of lead sulfate layers on negative plates of VRLA batteries subjected to HRPSoC duty. The technique involves the application of sets of charging pulses of different frequency. It is found that the cycle-life performance of VRLA batteries is enhanced markedly when d.c. pulses of high frequency are used. For example, battery durability is raised from not, vert, similar10 600 cycles (no pulses) to 32 000 cycles with pulses of high frequency. Two key factors contribute to this improvement. The first factor is localization of the charging current on the surfaces of the plates — the higher the frequency, the greater is the amount of current concentrated on the plate surface. This phenomenon is known as the ‘skin effect’ as only the outer ‘skin’ of the plate is effectively carrying the current. The second factor is delivery of sufficient charge to the Faradaic resistance of the plate to compensate for the energy loss to inductance and double-layer capacitance effects. The Faradaic resistance represents the electrochemical reaction, i.e., conversion of lead sulfate to lead. The inductance simply results from the connection either between the cables and the terminals of the battery or between the terminals, bus-bars, and the lugs of the plates. The capacitance arises from the double layer which exists at the interface between the plate and the electrolyte solution. These findings have provided a demonstration and a scientific explanation of the benefit of superimposed pulsed current charging in suppressing the sulfation of negative plates in VRLA batteries operated under 42-V PowerNet and hybrid electric vehicle duties.

A Novel Pulse™ device has been developed by the CSIRO. This device has the capability to be programmable to suite various applications and can be miniaturized to be encapsulated in the battery cover.
