Objective: Ultrawideband radar imaging is regarded as one of the most promising alternatives for breast cancer detection. A range of algorithms reported in literature shows satisfactory tumor detection capabilities. However, most of algorithms suffer significant deterioration or even fail when the early-stage artifact, including incident signals and skin-fat interface reflections, cannot be perfectly removed from received signals. Furthermore, fibro-glandular tissue poses another challenge for tumor detection, due to the small dielectric contrast between glandular and cancerous tissues. Methods: This paper introduces a novel Robust and Artifact Resistant (RAR) algorithm, in which a neighborhood pairwise correlation-based weighting is designed to overcome the adverse effects from both artifact and glandular tissues. In RAR, backscattered signals are time-shifted, summed, and weighted by the maximum combination of the neighboring pairwise correlation coefficients between shifted signals, forming the intensity of each point within an imaging area. Results: The effectiveness was investigated using 3-D anatomically and dielectrically accurate finite-difference-time-domain numerical breast models. The use of neighborhood pairwise correlation provided robustness against artifact and enabled the detection of multiple scatterers. RAR is compared with four well-known algorithms: delay-and-sum, delay-multiply-and-sum, modified-weighted-delay-and-sum, and filtered-delay-and-sum. Conclusion: It has shown that RAR exhibits improved identification capability, robust artifact resistance, and high detectability over its counterparts in most scenarios considered, while maintaining computational efficiency. Simulated tumors in both homogeneous and heterogonous, from mildly to moderately dense breast phantoms, combining an entropy-based artifact removal algorithm, were successfully identified and localized. Significance: These results show the strong potential of RAR for breast cancer- screening.
