In this paper, we tackle the problem of multi-cell resource scheduling, where the objective is to maximize the weighted sum-rate through inter-cell interference coordination (ICIC). The blanking method is used to mitigate the inter-cell interference, where a resource is either used with a predetermined transmit power or not used at all, i.e., blanked. This problem is known to be strongly NP-hard, which means that it is not only hard to solve in polynomial time, but it is also hard to find an approximation algorithm with guaranteed optimality gap. In this work, we identify special scenarios where a polynomial-time algorithm can be constructed to solve this problem with theoretical guarantees. In particular, we define a dominant interference environment, in which for each user the received power from each interferer is significantly greater than the aggregate received power from all other weaker interferers. We show that the originally strongly NP-hard problem can be tightly relaxed to a linear programming problem in a dominant interference environment. Consequently, we propose a polynomial time distributed algorithm that is not only guaranteed to be tight in a dominant interference environment, but which also computes an upper bound on the optimality gap without additional computational complexity. The proposed scheme is based on the primal-decomposition method, where the problem is divided into a master-problem and multiple subproblems. We solve the master-problem iteratively using the projected-subgradient method. We also show that each subproblem has a special network flow structure. By exploiting this network structure, each subproblem is solved using the network-based optimization methods, which significantly reduces the complexity in comparison to the general-purpose convex or linear optimization methods. In comparison with baseline schemes, simulation results of the International Mobile Telecommunications-Advanced (IMT-Advanced) scenarios show that the propos- d scheme achieves higher gains in aggregate throughput, cell-edge throughput, and outage probability.
