A fully nonlinear analysis for prediction of shear crippling (kinkband) type propagating
instability in long thick laminated composite cylindrical shells is presented. The primary accomplishment
of the present investigation is prediction of equilibrium paths, which are often unstable, in the
presence of interlaminar shear deformation, and which usually deviate from the classical lamination
theory (CLT)-based equilibrium paths, representing global or structural level stability. A nonlinear
finite element methodology, based on a three-dimensional hypothesis, known as layerwise linear
displacement distribution theory (LLDT) and the total Lagrangian formulation, is developed to
predict the aforementioned instability behavior of long laminated thick cylindrical shell type structures
and evaluate failure modes when radial/hydrostatic compressive loads are applied. The most
important computational feature is the successful implementation of an incremental displacement
control scheme beyond the limit point to compute the unstable postbuckling path. A long (plane
strain) thick laminated composite [90/0/90] imperfect cylinder is investigated with the objective of
analytically studying its premature compressive failure behavior. Thickness effect (i.e. interlaminar
shear/normal deformation) is clearly responsible for causing the appearance of limit point on the
postbuckling equilibrium path, thus lowering the load carrying capability of the long composite
cylinder, and localizing the failure pattern, which is associated with spontaneous breaking of the
periodicity of classical or modal buckling patterns. In analogy to the phase transition phenomena,
Maxwell construction is employed to (a) correct the unphysical negative slope of the computed
equilibrium paths encountered in the case of thicker cylinders modeled by the finite elements
methods that fail to include micro-structural defects, such as fiber waviness or misalignments, and
(b) to compute the propagating pressure responsible for interlaminar shear crippling or kinkband
type propagating instability. This type of instability triggered by the combined effect of interlaminar
shear/normal deformation and geometric imperfections, such as fiber misalignment, appears to be
one of the dominant compressive failure modes for moderately thick and thick cylinders with radiusto-
thickness ratio below the corresponding critical value. A three-dimensional theory, such as the
LLDT, is essential for capturing the interlaminar shear crippling type propagating instability.
© 1997 Elsevier Science Ltd
