This paper deals with the application of the adjoint variable approach to sensitivity analysis of objective functions
used for defect detection from knowledge of supplementary boundary data, in connection with the use of BIE/BEM
formulations for the relevant forward problem. The main objective is to establish expressions for crack shape sensitivity,
based on the adjoint variable approach, that are suitable for BEM implementation.
In order to do so, it is useful to consider first the case of a cavity defect, for which such boundary-only sensitivity
expressions are obtained for general initial geometry and shape perturbations. The analysis made in the cavity defect
case is then seen to break down in the limiting case of a crack. However, a closer analysis reveals that sensitivity
formulas suitable for BEM implementation can still be established. First, particular sensitivity formulas are obtained
for special shape transformations (translation, rotation or expansion of the crack) for either two- or three-dimensional
geometries which, except for the case of crack expansion together with dynamical governing equations, are made only
of surface integrals (three-dimensional geometries) or line integrals (two-dimensional geometries). Next, arbitrary shape
transformations are accommodated by using an additive decomposition of the transformation velocity over a tubular
neighbourhood of the crack front, which leads to sensitivity formulas. This leads to sensitivity formulas involving
integrals on the crack, the tubular neighbourhood and its boundary. Finally, the limiting case of the latter results when
the tubular neighbourhood shrinks around the crack front is shown to yield a sensitivity formula involving the stress
intensity factors of both the forward and the adjoint solutions. Classical path-independent integrals are recovered as
special cases.
The main exposition is done in connection with the scalar transient wave equation. The results are then extended to
the linear time-domain elastodynamics framework. Linear static governing equations are contained as obvious special
cases. Numerical results for crack shape sensitivity computation are presented for two-dimensional time-domain
elastodynamics
