This work addressed the retrieval of land surface emissivity (LSE) and land surface temperature (LST) by using Middle Infra-Red (MIR) and Thermal Infra-Red (TIR) channels from the data acquired by the Stretched Visible and Infrared Spin Scan Radiometer (SVISSR) onboard Chinese geostationary meteorological satellite FengYun 2C (FY-2C). SVISSR/FY-2C sensor acquires image covering the full disk with a temporal resolution of 30 minutes. The LST and LSE retrieval procedures can be shown as follows. Firstly, taking into the fact that land surface is non-lambertian characteristics, the time-series bi-directional reflectances in SVISSR/FY-2C MIR channel 4 (3.8 &#956;m ) were estimated from the combined MIR and TIR channels with day-night SVISSR/FY-2C data. A diurnal temperature cycle (DTC) model was used to correct for the atmospheric effects. The atmospheric profile data provided by European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) were adopted with the aid of the radiative transfer code (MODTRAN 4.0). Secondly, a Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) model named as RossThick-LiSparse-R model was used to estimate the hemispherical directional reflectance in MIR channel from the time-series bi-directional reflectance data. Then, the LSE in MIR channel can be retrieved according to Kirchhoff´s law. The LSEs in TIR channels can be estimated based on the Temperature Independent Spectral Indices (TISI) concept. And the LST can be retrieved using the split-window algorithm. Finally, a cross-validation method was used to evaluate the retrieval accuracies with the Moderate-resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) MOD11B1 LST/LSE V5 product. The results demonstrated that the emissivities in 11 &#956;m and 12 &#956;m were underestimated approximately 0.003 and 0.004 compared with MOD11B1 LSE product over the study area. The FY-2C LST were overestimated approximately 1.65 K and 2.87 K during the night-time and day-time, respectively, compared - ith MOD11B1 LST product over the study area.
