Previous work had identified six biomechanical functions that need to be executed by each limb in order to produce a variety of pedaling tasks. The functions can be organized into three antagonistic pairs: an Ext/Flex pair that accelerates the foot into extension or flexion with respect to the pelvis, an Ant/Post pair that accelerates the foot anteriorly or posteriorly with respect to the pelvis, and a Plant/Dorsi pair that accelerates the foot into plantarflexion or dorsiflexion. Previous analyses of experimental data have inferred that muscles perform the same function during different pedaling tasks (e.g. forward versus backward pedaling) because the EMG timing was similar, but they did not present rigorous biomechanical analyses to assess whether a muscle performed the same biomechanical function, and if so, to what degree. Therefore, the objective of this study was to determine how individual muscles contribute to these biomechanical functions during two different motor tasks, forward and backward pedaling, through a theoretical analysis of experimental data. To achieve this objective, forward and backward pedaling simulations were generated and a mechanical energy analysis was used to examine how muscles generate, absorb or transfer energy to perform the pedaling tasks. The results showed that the muscles contributed to the same primary biomechanical functions in both pedaling directions and that synergistic performance of certain functions effectively accelerated the crank. The gluteus maximus worked synergistically with the soleus, the hip flexors worked synergistically with the tibialis anterior, and the vasti and hamstrings functioned independently to accelerate the crank. The rectus femoris used complex biomechanical mechanisms including negative muscle work to accelerate the crank. The negative muscle work was used to transfer energy generated elsewhere (primarily from other muscles) to the pedal reaction force in order to accelerate the crank. Consistent with experimental data, a phase shift was required from those muscles contributing to the Ant/Post functions as a result of the different limb kinematics between forward and backward pedaling, although they performed the same biomechanical function. The pedaling simulations proved necessary to interpret the experimental data and identify motor control mechanisms used to accomplish specific motor tasks, as the mechanisms were often complex and not always intuitively obvious.
