Mathematical models of the muscle excitation are useful in forward dynamic simulations of human movement tasks. One objective was to demonstrate that sloped as opposed to rectangular excitation waveforms improve the accuracy of forward dynamic simulations. A second objective was to demonstrate the differences in simulated muscle forces using sloped versus rectangular waveforms. To fulfill these objectives, surface EMG signals from the triceps brachii and elbow joint angle were recorded and the intersegmental moment of the elbow joint was computed from 14 subjects who performed two cyclic elbow extension experiments at 200 and 300 deg/s. Additionally, the surface EMG signals from the leg musculature, joint angles, and pedal forces were recorded and joint intersegmental moments were computed during a more complex pedaling task (90 rpm at 250 W). Using forward dynamic simulations, four optimizations were performed in which the experimental intersegmental moment was tracked for the elbow extension tasks and four optimizations were performed in which the experimental pedal angle, pedal forces, and joint intersegmental moments were tracked for the pedaling task. In these optimizations the three parameters (onset and offset time, and peak excitation) defining the sloped (triangular, quadratic, and Hanning) and rectangular excitation waveforms were varied to minimize the difference between the simulated and experimentally tracked quantities. For the elbow extension task, the intersegmental elbow moment root mean squared error, onset timing error, and offset timing error were less from simulations using a sloped excitation waveform compared to a rectangular excitation waveform (p<0.001). The average and peak muscle forces were from 7% to 16% larger and 20–28% larger, respectively, when using a rectangular excitation waveform. The tracking error for pedaling also decreased when using a sloped excitation waveform, with the quadratic waveform generating the smallest tracking errors for both tasks. These results support the use of sloped over rectangular excitation waveforms to establish greater confidence in the results of forward dynamic simulations.
