The pericellular matrix of articular cartilage has been shown to regulate the mechanical environment of chondrocytes. However, little is known about the mechanical role of collagen fibrils in the pericellular matrix, and how fibrils might help modulate strains acting on chondrocytes when cartilage is loaded. The primary objective was to clarify the effect of pericellular collagen fibrils on cell volume changes and strains during cartilage loading. Secondary objectives were to investigate the effects of pericellular fixed charges and fluid on cell responses. A microstructural model of articular cartilage, in which chondrocytes and pericellular matrices were represented with depth-dependent structural and morphological properties, was created. The extracellular matrix and pericellular matrices were modeled as fibril-reinforced, biphasic materials with swelling capabilities, while chondrocytes were assumed to be isotropic and biphasic with swelling properties. Collagen fibrils in the extracellular matrix were represented with an arcade-like architecture, whereas pericellular fibrils were assumed to run tangential to the cell surface. In the early stages of a stress–relaxation test, pericellular fibrils were found to sensitively affect cell volume changes, even producing a reversal from increasing to decreasing cell volume with increasing fibril stiffness in the superficial zone. Consequently, steady-state volume of the superficial zone cell decreased with increasing pericellular fibril stiffness. Volume changes in the middle and deep zone chondrocytes were smaller and opposite to those observed in the superficial zone chondrocyte. An increase in the pericellular fixed charge density reduced cell volumes substantially in every zone. The sensitivity of cell volume changes to pericellular fibril stiffness suggests that pericellular fibrils play an important, and as of yet largely neglected, role in regulating the mechanical environment of chondrocytes, possibly affecting matrix synthesis during cartilage development and degeneration, and affecting biosynthetic responses associated with articular cartilage loading.
