Cloud computing is offering efficacy oriented IT services to users throughout the world. It enables the hosting of assorted applications from user, scientific, commercial as well as business domains. The core inspiration following Cloud Computing is that the entire system can be controlled as well as worked using simply an HTTP client. The cloud user is required to have only a web based client to make exertions with Cloud Systems and all its applications, including office apps, business modules or personal information systems. It is applied to both modern and obsolete systems. An Open Source Platform designed to hold a wide assortment of Web Applications. Cloud Operating Systems was thought of its new definition that everything inside it can be accessed &amp; acquired from everywhere inside a Network All the user is required to do is login into Cloud Operating Application server with a normal web client, and access to the desktop, with your documents, applications, movies, music and all etc. Cloud Operating Systems lets you upload your files and work with them regardless of your location. It contains almost all applications such as Word Processor, PDF reader, Address Book and many more developed by the Cloud developers and Cloud vendors. Cloud Storage provides the web based users with storage space and make user friendly and timely acquire and store data, which is mainly the foundation of each type of cloud applications. However, there is requirement of deep analysis on how to optimize cloud storage aiming at improvement of data accessing and data storing performance. In this paper, we have proposed the mathematical description as well as the algorithmic approach for cloud storage optimization and as an objective optimization problem which is solved by our proposed optimized algorithm; as a result the data is distributed in appropriate nodes with the best efficiency. The simulation or investigational results demonstrate the performance of the algorithms analogous - o MapReduce Hadoop technology in BigData paradigm.
