The objective of this paper is to explain the appropriately database partitions and accessing the required of the deterministic data in the form of streams. The part of data bases is maintained for a variety and a number of manageable and performance related reasons. As a whole there must be a balance among the various requirements. It was observed in so many numbers of organizations, that particularity not all the information in the fact table may be actively used at a particular point of time. The paper is particularly meant for to explain the way of partitions of the fact table which will speeds up the particular query by minimizing the sets of data to be scanned. In practice the fact table partition expected each of the segments to be the same size as all the other fact tables in the data base. The required number of transactions in the business for a given point in the annual period may not be the same as number of transactions at a different point in the next year. At some time, the fact table is partitioned monthly also requires more number of partitions which are larger than others tables. To get an optimal solution the address of possible discrepancy should take in to consideration. The deterministic of horizontal partitions has to take into consideration with the requirements for manageability of the data base. The fact table is described on time period basis because at particular time schedules the business grows. The time period represents a significant decreasing period with in the business. The data streams are searching techniques to retrieve such fact table transactions. The query period is fortnight for the time and date, and then the partitioning was done fortnightly because the access of the required data and the information should not exceed the total number of fact tables. The table partitions are reusable, by removal of the data in the tables. The main motto is to consider the partitions which are stored the transaction over a business hours a- d the rest of the table may be vary which are smaller. The paper describes the partitioning and access the required data in the form of data streams.
