Environmental awareness and sustainable development based on long-term diversification of energy sources are key points on the agenda of energy policy-makers. As part of electrical power systems UDNs are evolving from the present traditional electricity supply network towards more decentralized system with smaller, more efficient generation unit normally connected directly to the network at consumer sites. Combined Heat &amp; Power (CHP) generation is the most efficient way of energy supply in urban area available today. It delivers significant benefits to its host facilities and urban distributed network (UDN) to which is connected. Economic viability of CHP generation for many sites requires integration with the UDN for backup and supplementary power needs and in some case the export of excess power to the UDN. CHP system integration into existing UDN entail installation costs. How these integration costs are distributed will have considerable impact on development and implementation of CHP generation in urban areas. The objective of this paper is to use analytical and statistical methods to develop an algorithm that provide means of determining the optimum capacity of a CHP generating plant that can be accommodated within the UDN, which correspond to Least Cost Technically Acceptable (LCTA) principle, and the UDN long term network planning policy. In order to determine optimal size of CHP generating plant that could be connected at any particular busbar on the UDN without causing a significant adverse impact on performance of the UDN and with minimum connection cost an algorithm is created that incorporates an analytical and multiple regression analysis model. It is tested using data obtained from ERAC power analysing software incorporating load flow, fault current level and power losses analysis. Additional data needed for effective algorithm creation was obtained via surveys of local UDN operators and planners. These analyses are performed on a 34 busbar netw- rk resembling part of the real UDN of Cork city for validation purposes and accuracy of the algorithm proposed.
