Summary form only given. Automotive customers´ expectations have significantly changed in the past decade. They are influenced by new technologies such as the high-bandwith mobile Internet and increasingly capable mobile consumer electronics devices. At the same time, urbanization and the necessity for ecological sustainability provoke new demands. Internet based communities are drivers for a developing Shareconomy. It is evident that that the conventional car, whether it is the all mechanical Auto 1.0 or the electronics and driving assistance systems loaded Auto 2.0, will not be able to meet these expectations and demands. The upcoming Auto 3.0 is no longer mobility hardware, but instead integral part of a seamless intermodal mobility chain for individuals. It is connected with the surrounding environment and other modes of transport. It is capable of understanding the mobility requirements of the individual, and it delivers the right information at the right time in order to make the right decisions. For this to work, the Auto 3.0 will need access to all sorts of data that is always current, comprehensive, filtered, and geographically referenced. Important enabling technologies are cross-OEM crowd sourcing of data as well as processing and real-time data analytics in the cloud. The vehicle finally becomes part of the Internet of Things. Benefits that can already today be achieved are for example traffic jam avoidance by enrichment of the navigation map with relevant real-time traffic flow information, reduction of CO2 emissions by anticipatory adaption of engines, power train and recuperation, and extension of the mileage of electric vehicles. The next steps are to open up the systems and to establish market places for the interconnection of different services. Traditionally, the Internet of Things, services realized by combining sensors, computing backends, and apps are part of a single offering and cannot be combined with other services. Platforms such as IFTT- , on the other hand, connect different ecosystems and enable a new class of services. Especially the Auto 3.0 will benefit from such an open platform which allows the implementation of multiplicity of connected and location-based services including data from numerous systems, operators, and stakeholders. Additional potentials in efficiency for future smart cities can be realized by this interconnection of different systems and participants such as vehicles, buildings, urban administration, and utilities. Establishing such a platform is an important objective.
