On behalf of the Technical Program Committee, we welcome all of you to the IEEE Computing, Management and Telecommunications Conference (IEEE ComManTel 2014) in the beautiful campus of Duy Tan University, Da Nang City, Vietnam! We are indeed delighted that the conference aims to providing a premier forum for presentation of research results and experience reporting on the cutting edge research in the general areas of computing, telecommunications, management and their applications. This year, we have received many high quality submissions from more than 22 countries. Each paper received at least three peer technical reviews, comprised of more than 160 TPC members from academia, government laboratories, and industries. After carefully examining all the received review reports, the IEEE ComManTel 2014 TPC finally selected only very high quality papers for presentation at the conference and publication in the IEEE ComManTel 2014 proceedings. The first day will start with a free Tutorial presentation chosen from renowned world-class leaders in the area. On Sunday, Prof. Hossam Hassanein, from Queen´s University, Canada will talk about the &#8220;The Evolution of Information Networks around Data.&#8221; On Monday, we start the with a Keynote Speech delivered by IEEE Fellow and Distinguished Professor Hsiao-Hwa Chen of the National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan. He will talk to us about the &#8220;Design of MIMO systems based on chip-level space-time coded CDMA system.&#8221; Right after the Keynote, Prof. Markus Fiedler from the Blekinge Institute of Technology, Sweden, will also deliver a free Tutorial on &#8220;Quantitative Relationships Between QoE and Energy Consumption.&#8221; This year, the technical sessions reflect the growing interest in a wide range of spectrum, including wireless communications and networks, computing aspects, management and applications of these technologies in our daily lives. Outstanding papers will be selected and invited for- Special Issues in well-known international journals and top quality papers will receive the Best Paper Award. Our objective in the future is to increase the quality and therefore reduce the acceptance rate further. In addition, we would like to increase the number of Tracks to cover other areas and introduce Workshops that of interest to meet the conference theme.
