Objectives
The present study evaluates complete supra-annular bioprostheses in patients with an aortic annulus of 18 to 23 mm in diameter.
Background

Aortic valve replacement in patients with small aortic annulus using stented bioprostheses is often associated with unsatisfactory hemodynamic results and high incidence of patient-prosthesis mismatch.
Methods

Between February 2000 and January 2004, 156 patients with aortic valve disease and an aortic annulus of 18 to 23 mm in diameter received the stented bovine Soprano (Sorin Biomedica Cardio, Saluggia, Italy) (n = 18), Perimount (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, California) (n = 52), Perimount Magna (Edwards Lifesciences) (n = 42), or the stented porcine Mosaic (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota) (n = 44) bioprostheses. Intraoperatively, the surgeon measured the aortic annulus diameter by inserting a hegar dilator. Thus, postoperative hemodynamic results could be referred to the patient’s aortic annulus diameter instead of referring the results to the labeled valve size. This allows for objective comparisons between different valve types.
Results

There was no significant difference in hemodynamic results between the different valve types in patients with an aortic annulus 18 to 20 mm. In patients with an annulus 21 to 23 mm, the Magna was significantly superior to the other investigated devices in mean pressure gradient, effective orifice area, and incidence of patient-prosthesis mismatch. There was no significant difference between the complete supra-annular bioprostheses Mosaic and Soprano and the intra-supra-annular Perimount valve.
Conclusions

In patients with an aortic annulus of 18 to 20 mm in diameter, hemodynamic performance is independent of the implanted stented valve type and the annular position. Root enlargement or stentless valves may be beneficial alternatives. Patients with annulus diameter 21 to 23 mm benefit from the Magna in complete supra-annular position leading to superior hemodynamic results.
