In the last two decades, in the transportation sector, use of air conditioner in buses, cars, trains and aviation industry increased rapidly. Further, with the growth in agriculture sector towards food processing industry, including storage plants which need high capacity refrigeration plants for storage, preservation and transportation of end products, use of an air-conditioner or refrigeration is increased. As fuel consumption is the only available energy in transportation for mobile air conditioner, reduction of fuel consumption has direct positive effect in improving fuel consumption efficiency, reducing pollution and saving economy. So far as moving vehicles are concerned, the air conditioner (passenger based transportation) or refrigeration (preservation of different food items during transportation) units are in the form of pay-loads carried on vehicles. Thus, the primary objective is transportation, while luxury, comfort and preservation are the secondary considerations. In this context, the availability of embedded processor based electronic modules installed in air conditioner or refrigeration units is the technological need. In order to realize such embedded systems, the associated electronic hardware has to have built-in features for energy saving. The emphasis at the technical specification (including tender document requirement) for incorporating these energy saving modules does not appear specifically since most of the times, these units do not support the hardware features for energy saving. This paper brings out fuzzy logic based approaches for energy saving in the design and implementation of electronic hardware systems for air conditioner units.This paper proposes an off-the shelf method for making air conditioner units more energy efficient, which reduces fuel consumed by mobile air conditioner facility available in different transportation vehicles. Reduction in fuel consumption has direct impact on the environment which is very unique thing wh- le addressing issues in the renewable and non-renewable energy sectors. The electronic hardware implementation is carried out using Xilinx ISE Design Suite 14.2 with Verilog-HDL.
