The prime objective of any technological innovation is to improve the life of people. Technological innovation in the field of medical devices directly touches the lives of millions of people; not just patients but doctors and other technicians as well. Serving these care givers is serving humanity. Growth of Mobil Devices and Cloud Computing has changed the way we live and work. We try to bring the benefits of these technological innovations to the medical field via equipment which can improve the working efficiencies and capabilities of the medical professionals and technicians. The improvements in the camera and image processing capabilities of the Mobile Devices coupled with their improved processing power and an infinite processing and storage offered by Cloud Computing infrastructure opens up a window of opportunity to use them in the specialized field like microsurgery. To enable microsurgery, surgeons use optical microscope to zoom into the working area to get better visibility and control. However, these devices suffer from various drawbacks and are not comfortable to use. We build a Tablet with large stereoscopic screen allowing glasses free 3D display enabled by cameras capable of capturing 3D video and enhanced by an image processing pipeline, greatly improves the visibility and viewing comfort of the surgeon. Moreover using the capabilities of Cloud computing, these surgeries can be recorded and streamed live for education, training and consultation. An expert sitting in a geographically remote location can guide the surgeon performing the surgery. All vital parameters of the patient undergoing surgery can be shown as an overlay on the Tablet screen so that the surgeon is alerted of any parameter going beyond limit. Developing this kind of complex device involves engineering skills in hardware and software and huge amount of investments in terms of time, resources and money. To accelerate the development, we make use of open source hardware and softwar- and demonstrate how we can accelerate the development using these open source resources.
