According to the statistics of the World Health Organization 15 percent of the world population lives with some kind of a disability. This statistic further indicates that 10 percent of the Sri Lankan total population also has some kind of disability. Sri Lanka suffered three decades of civil war. As a result no of disabled people gradually increased. Most of the civilians disadvantage of getting benefits of ICT during that period. As a result the war ending in 2009, the government strategies for the future were directed more on the Development of the country. Sri Lanka ICT literacy rate was increases 8% in 2005. It was increases up to 40% in 2013. Government focuses to be 75 percent by the year 2015. The motivation behind this research is to overcome disability digital divide in Sri Lanka and facilitate more opportunities for them to enjoy in the digital world. The objective of this study is to propose a Web, Mobile and Computer related ICT model to bridge the disability digital divide gap in Sri Lanka and improve the quality of life of the differently abled community in Sri Lanka. This study involved Literature survey, and many different data gathering techniques mainly group discussions, interviews and site visiting more than 107 samples were interviewed to propose the model. Sri Lankan Participants for this study were inclusive of informal interviews with different communities, different disabled categories and different geographical locations. Study findings were indicated that most of the Sri Lankan differently abled community is not aware and not benefited from globally available modern technologies available for this community. This model is basically proposed based on the initial study has done in phase one to eliminate Disability Digital Divide in Sri Lanka and this paper is a revised model proposed by the same author. This new model includes guidelines to eliminate categories under disability digital divide in Web services, Mobile devises, Computer devis- s. This paper further proposes to consider the areas in ICT to be considered and the responsible authorities and stakeholders who need to take the initiation to eliminate the disability digital divide in Sri Lanka.
