Objective
A prospective, randomized, two center clinical study was conducted to evaluate the impact on wound healing of Suprathel® in donor sites of split-thickness skin grafts. Suprathel® represents an absorbable, synthetic wound dressing with properties of natural epithelium.
Methods
22 burn patients who were treated with split-thickness skin grafts, and with a mean age of 39.6 years were included in the study. Donor sites of skin grafts were randomly selected; partly treated with Jelonet® and partly treated with Suprathel®. First gauze change was carried out the fifth day postoperatively followed by regular wound inspection until complete re-epithelization. The study focused on patient pain score, healing time, analysis of wound bed, ease of care, and treatment costs.
Results
There was no significant difference between the two materials tested regarding healing time and re-epithelization. There was a significantly lower pain score for patients treated with Suprathel® (p = 0.0002). Suprathel® became transparent when applied and allowed close monitoring of wound healing. In contrast to Jelonet®, Suprathel® showed excellent plasticity with better attachment and adherence to wound surfaces. Throughout the healing process it detached from wounds without damaging the new epithelial surface. In addition, wound areas treated with Suprathel® required less frequent dressing changes. It also demonstrated excellent ease of care. This, altogether with the significant pain reduction, presented a positive feedback by patients and healthcare professionals who both rated Suprathel® as their treatment preference. Though Jelonet® is more cost effective as dressing material, the study revealed an overall reduction in total treatment costs achieved with Suprathel®.
Conclusion
Suprathel® represents a solid, reliable epidermal skin substitute with impact on wound healing, patient comfort and ease of care. The material effectiveness contributes to the reduction of overall treatment costs.

