The Space Interferometry Mission (SIM) is a space-based 10 m baseline Michelson interferometer. Planned for launch in 2005 aboard a Delta III launch vehicle, or equivalent, its primary objective is to measure the positions of stars and other celestial objects with an unprecedented accuracy of 4 micro arc seconds. The configuration of the space flight system to meet the very challenging requirements imposed by such an instrument has evolved considerably. This paper will discuss the evolution of the configuration and discuss some of the factors that have driven the overall configuration. SIM has undergone several transformations since the start of Phase A. During this phase of a project, it is desirable to perform system level trade studies, so the substantial evolution of the design that has occurred is quite appropriate. Part of the trade-off process has addressed two major underlying architectures: SIM Classic; and Son of SIM. The difference between these two architectures is related to the overall arrangement of the optical elements and the associated metrology system. Several different configurations have been developed for each architecture. Some of the more important aspects will be discussed. SIM has some extremely challenging goals: millikelvin thermal stability, nanometer stabilization of optics, picometer measurement of wavefront, and others. The projected viability of some of these areas has influenced design choices during the evolution of the many configurations that have been developed. For instance, the perceived complexity of the IR laser metrology system used to measure and control the positions of key optical elements was the strongest discriminator between the two architectures, and led to a decision to select SOS rather than Classic. More recently, an appreciation of the sensitivity to beam-walk within the SOS architecture is forcing a reconsideration of that decision. There is some hope that a full aperture metrology system may alleviate this issue
