Owing to high complexity of life activity, the dynamic complex response of objective visual channel had never been studied by human being but it is very important to understand life activity actually. Along with the measure sequences of human genome has successfully been carried out. Proteome is investigating its functions and structures. As a matter of fact, all these are not dynamic to get the hereditary information of organism based on off body condition, the organisms only have activity but they are dead already. We hope to research micro-dynamics of life activity in the physiological system based on physiology step by step and to developmentally investigate at cell level or even at gene level for understanding life activity and modulating mechanism simultaneously in order to make important progress little by little. In the article, relatively comparative independent visual system resolved from sophisticated human body and connected cognition studies the dynamic complex response of cognitive progresses with visual stimuli and uses to understand the function of information processing system in brain. As a result of cognitive psychology related to cognitive process, on one hand, researchers can directly take part in studies that investigated how to get perception from recognizable objects and surroundings by subject and worked on the cognitive information. On other hand they can learn from experience about the sense of characteristics of dynamic response at the same time. Due to our researches directly participates in experiments by themselves, they much better know the response progresses which what have happened directly perceived through the senses. It much helps to theoretical analysis. Using a multi-channel of visual cortex evoked potential (VCEP) collecting system for this research; we studied the mechanisms of the brain function and stereoscopic information processing, and identified a new N2 wave of VCEP as the characteristic response to the disparity depth stimuli. The VCEP of vary visual functional areas evoked by the specially designed RDS uncovered that the information processing of the disparity depth perception starts at the striate cortex but ends at the advanced cortical areas. Besides, we employed several independent methods to have- proved the new N2 wave existence. The result also convincingly proved the supposition, which proposed that the depth cognition of stereoscopic vision is a dynamic multi-factor synchronizes cooperated processing and the consequence of depth perception in advanced cortical areas may get through biological feedback to the whole process of visual signal processing. The delays and peak to peak in time series of dynamic response happened in advanced visual cortex are about 340 ms and 5.0 uv in lead P4, 339 ms and 3.7 uv in P3, 339 ms and 4.0 uv in T1. Both experimental and complex dynamic computing results are given in the text.
