Objectives. Our objective was to determine whether catheterization dat obtained after  fenestrated Fontan operation influenced patient management or predicted functional status.

Background. Cardiac catheterization after  fenestrated Fontan operation is undertaken to identify residual lesions and to observe the patient's response to test occlusion of the baffle fenestration.

Methods. Sixty patients undergoing both  fenestrated Fontan operation before July 1991 and  postoperative catheterization before March 1992 were included in the study. Catheterization dat were collected according to  test occlusion protocol; these dat were reviewed, and the patient's clinical status at follow-up was ascertained.

Results. Test occlusion resulted in  significant increase in systemic venous pressure, arterial oxygen saturation and arteriovenous difference in oxygen content (p < 0.0001). After test occlusion, systemic venous pressure was 40% higher and systemic venous saturation 23% lower among patients with an unfavorable versus  favorable response to test occlusion, although differences between the two groups were subtle or inapparent in the baseline state. Branch pulmonary artery stenosis (identified and balloon dilated in 6 patients) and grade 2 or 3 aortopulmonary collateral vessels (identified and coil embolized in 20) were associated with elevation in systemic venous pressure (p < 0.01). After an average of 2 years of follow-up, there were no deaths, and 50 (83%) of 60 patients were in New York Heart Association functional class I. The only postoperative characteristic significantly associated with being in functional class I at follow-up was  systemic venous pressure <17 mm Hg.

Conclusions. Cardiac catheterization with test occlusion of the interatrial communication provides useful information after  fenestrated Fontan operation. Conditions associated with elevated systemic venous pressure should be sought and treated, and the response of systemic venous pressure to test occlusion should be considered when deciding whether to close an interatrial communication.
