Objectives. The purpose of this study was to identify qualitative or quantitative variables present on angioscopy, intravascular ultrasound imaging or quantitative coronary arteriography that were associated with adverse clinical outcome after coronary intervention in high risk patients.

Background. Patients with acute coronary syndromes and complex lesion morphology on angiography are at increased risk for acute complications after coronary angioplasty. Newer devices that primarily remove atherom have not improved outcome over that of balloon angioplasty. Intravascular imaging can accurately identify intraluminal and intramural histopathologic features not adequately visualized during coronary arteriography and may provide mechanistic insight into the pathogenesis of abrupt closure and restenosis.

Methods. Sixty high risk patients with unstable coronary syndromes and complex lesions on angiography underwent angioscopy (n = 40) and intravascular ultrasound imaging (n = 46) during interventional procedures. In 26 patients, both angioscopy and intravascular ultrasound were performed in the same lesion. All patients underwent off-line quantitative coronary arteriography. Coronary interventions included balloon (n = 21) and excimer laser (n = 4) angioplasty, directional (n = 19) and rotational (n = 6) atherectomy and stent implantation (n = 11). Patients were followed up for 1 year for objective evidence of recurrent ischemia.

Results. Patients whose clinical presentation included rest angin or acute myocardial infarction or who received thrombolytic therapy within 24 h of procedure were significantly more likely to experience recurrent ischemi after intervention. Plaque rupture or thrombus on preprocedure angioscopy or angioscopic thrombus after intervention were also significantly associated with adverse outcome. Qualitative or quantitative variables on angiography, intravascular ultrasound of off-line quantitative arteriography were not associated with recurrent ischemi on univariate analysis. Multivariate predictors of recurrent ischemi were plaque rupture on preprocedure angioscopy (p < 0.05, odds ratio [OR] 10.15) and angioscopic thrombus after intervention (p < 0.05, OR 7.26).

Conclusions. Angioscopic plaque rupture and thrombus were independently associated with adverse outcome in patients with complex lesions after interventional procedures. These features were not identified by either angiography or intravascular ultrasound.
