Objectives. We sought to assess the results after bidirectional cavopulmonary shunt (BCPS) in infants <6 months old and to identify risk factors for poor outcome.

Background. Although BCPS is  well established procedure for the palliation of patients with  single-ventricle heart, there have been very few reports of outcomes after BCPS in young infants.

Methods. Since 1990, 42 infants between 0.8 and 6.0 months of age (mean [±SD] 3.7 ± 1.4) have undergone BCPS for primary (n = 16) or secondary (n = 26) palliation of tricuspid atresi (n = 13), hypoplastic left heart syndrome (n = 10) or other forms of functional single-ventricle heart (n = 19). Accessory pulmonary blood flow was included in 18 patients. Preoperative and perioperative dat were gathered on retrospective review of patient records, and follow-up was conducted by means of direct physician contact or record review.

Results. The overall hospital mortality rate, including that associated with reoperations, was 4.8% (2 of 42 patients). Seven patients (17%) required reoperation related to the BCPS or pulmonary blood flow in the early postoperative period: Procedures included take-down of the BCPS in four patients, with one early death, and procedures to decrease pulmonary blood flow in three patients. Age <1 month correlated significantly with early death and with early failure of the BCPS (death or take-down). Follow-up of the 37 patients discharged with intact BCPS was obtained at  mean ± SD of 14.3 ± 11.3 months postoperatively, during which time three patients died (at 6.5 ± 2.5 months). The 2-year actuarial survival rate for patients undergoing BCPS at <6 months of age was 86%. Overall freedom from death or take-down (including early and late events) was significantly lower in patients <2 months old than in those >2 months old. Four patients have undergone successful Fontan completion (18.3 ± 2.9 months postoperatively), and one patient whose BCPS was taken down subsequently underwent successful restoration of  BCPS.

Conclusions. Outcomes after BCPS in young infants are comparable to those in older infants and children. However, our current preference is to defer this procedure until after 2 months of age.
