Objectives. This study sought to investigate whether the identification of hibernating myocardium by low dose dobutamine stress echocardiography (LDSE) may predict an improvement in functional capacity after moderate exercise training in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy. Another objective was to assess whether exercise training may affect the outcome.

Background. There is evidence that exercise training improves left ventricular (LV) function as well as functional capacity in patients with  previous myocardial infarction and LV dysfunction. We hypothesized that the magnitude of these improvements might be related to the extent of hibernating myocardium.

Methods. We studied 71 consecutive patients 56 ± 9 years old (mean ± SD) with chronic heart failure secondary to ischemic cardiomyopathy (LV ejection fraction [LVEF] <40%). All patients were in sinus rhythm and were clinically stable during the previous 3 months. Patients were randomized into two matched groups. Group T (n = 36) underwent exercise training at 60% of peak oxygen uptake (imageimage2) three times  week for 10 weeks. Group C (n = 35) did not exercise. At study entry and end, all patients underwent an exercise test with gas exchange analysis and LDSE (5 to 20 μg/kg body weight per min).

Results. At baseline,  positive contractile response (CS+) to LDSE was observed in 317 of 576 segments in group T and 291 of 560 segments in group C. After 10 weeks, peak imageimage2 and peak work rate increased only in trained patients (peak imageimage2: from 16.2 ± 3 to 20.8 ± 4 ml/kg per min; work capacity: from 108 ± 20 to 131 ± 25 W, p < 0.001 vs. group C for both). The presence of CS+ at baseline was associated with  sensitivity of 70% and  specificity of 77% for predicting an increase in the functional capacity after exercise training. Positive and negative predictive values of LDSE were 84% and 59%, respectively. Independent predictors of cardiac events were  pre-to-posttraining difference in LVEF at peak dobutamine infusion and the presence of  viable response at baseline (p = 0.004 and 0.008, respectively). The log-rank test demonstrated that trained patients had  significantly lower probability of cardiac events during follow-up than sedentary control patients (p < 0.001).

Conclusions. The presence of hibernating myocardium as assessed by LDSE predicts the magnitude of improvement in functional capacity after moderate exercise training in patients with chronic heart failure.  significant increase in functional capacity after exercise training is associated with  lower incidence of cardiac events during follow-up.
