Objectives. This study was defined as  pilot investigation of the usefulness and safety of intravenous diltiazem as adjunctive therapy to tissue plasminogen activator in acute myocardial infarction, followed by oral therapy for 4 weeks.

Background. Experimental studies have documented that calcium antagonists protect the myocardial cell against the damage caused by coronary artery occlusion and reperfusion, yet no benefits have been conclusively demonstrated in acute myocardial infarction (AMI) in humans.

Methods. In this pilot study, 59 patients with an AMI treated with tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) were randomized, double blinded, to intravenous diltiazem or placebo for 48 h, followed by oral therapy for 4 weeks. The primary objective was to detect an effect on indices of regional left ventricular function and perfusion. Patients were also closely monitored for clinical events, coronary artery patency and indices of infarct size and of left ventricular function.

Results. Creatine kinase elevation, Q wave score, global and regional left ventricular function and coronary artery patency at 48 h were not significantly different between the diltiazem and placebo groups.  greater improvement observed in regional perfusion and function with diltiazem was likely explained by initial larger defects. Diltiazem, compared to placebo, reduced the rate of death, reinfarction or recurrent ischemi at 35 days from 41% to 13% (p = 0.027) and prevented the need for an urgent intervention. The rate of death or myocardial infarction was reduced by 65% (p = 0.15). These benefits could not be explained by differences in baseline characteristics such as age, site and extent of infarction, time of inclusion or concomitant therapy. Heart rate and blood pressure were reduced throughout the study with active diltiazem treatment. Side effects of diltiazem were bradycardi and hypotension that required transient or permanent discontinuation of the study drug in 27% of patients, vs. 17% of patients with placebo.

Conclusions.  protective effect for clinical events related to early postinfarction ischemi and reinfarction was suggested in this study, with diltiazem administered intravenously with t-P followed by oral therapy for 1 month, with no effect on coronary artery patency and left ventricular function and perfusion.
