Objective: Our objective was to determine the influence of the carbohydrate content of the diet preceding the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) in pregnancy on the test results and to evaluate the necessity of the recommended preparatory high-carbohydrate diet.
Study design: Thirty-four women from our outpatient clinic were enrolled in this prospective study. After giving informed consent, each women underwent a 90-min lesson (supervised by a dietary assistant) covering the carbohydrate, protein and fat content of different foods. Women were then randomized and in a crossover design started a diet with either a low or a high carbohydrate content. We were aiming at a carbohydrate intake of 40% in the low-carbohydrate week (LCH) and 50% in the high-carbohydrate week (HCH). Compliance was monitored by a detailed food diary which the women kept and which included the weight of the foods they consumed.
Results: The actual dietary intakes as calculated from the food diaries showed that the mean caloric intake was 1801 ± 314 kcal in the LCH and 2118 ± 312 kcal in the HCH week (<0.001). During the LCH diet, CH intake was 39 ± 6.1% and 49 ± 6.6% in the HCH week (P< 0.001). The carbohydrate intake per kilogram bodyweight was 30 ± 5.3 kcal vs. 35 ± 5.2 kcal (P< 0.001).
The number of patients diagnosed with gestational diabetes was two in the LCH and three in the HCH week (not significant). The sum of the OGTT values (fasting, 1 h and 2 h) after the LCH was 18.9 ± 2.1 mmol/l vs. 18.8 ± 2.1 mmol/l after the HCH (P = 0.51). No differences could be found in both groups regarding the fasting, 1-h, or 2-h glucose values. Including patients with a CH difference of at least 5%, 10%, and 15% carbohydrate between the weeks, we still did not observe any differences in the OGTT sum. We also looked at a possible influence of the CH content of the diet on the day before the test and of the last meal before the OGTT results and observed there was none.
Conclusion: This is the first study which has observed the influence of the previous day's meal on the test results. We conclude from our results that the carbohydrate percentage of the preparatory diet did not influence the results of an OGTT, even when we increased the difference in carbohydrate intake stepwise up to 15%. This might indicate that a preparatory diet before the OGTT is not necessary for women with normal nutritional behavior.

