Network planning and design for new distributed generation (DG) connections typically involves considerably more attention than that required for new demand connections. In particular, generation connections involve consideration of voltage rise, voltage flicker and harmonics, together with fault level limits on existing plant.The objective of this project was to develop a DG connection planning system for use by network planning staff, comprising NETMAP, EDF Energy´s Smallworld GIS application, with Smallworld Design Manager(*) and an embedded network analysis engine (DigSilent PowerFactory). In conjunction with EDF Energy, GE Energy (GE) and Realworld investigated the current planning processes and built a proof of concept solution that significantly reduced the time and effort required to build the network analysis model required by the planning team. The project demonstrated that there is the potential to significantly reduce the engineering time taken to create the network analysis models that are needed to support the DG connection request process. The potential business benefits include: 1. Improved customer service 2. Increased process efficiency 3. The opportunity to introduce a consistent, accurate process across the EDF Energy regions 4. Identification of other connection requests that are in the same area and are still in the planning stage 5. Provision of audit/tracking functionality and supporting evidence to provide quality assurance and replicate decisions made 6. Models are easily regenerated later 7. The ability to more easily manage enquiries at multiple offices/locations 8. The opportunity to more easily identify deep reinforcement requirements arising from multiple connection enquiries and other planned schemes which could also be managed through this system 9. The opportunity to extend the tool to meet OFGEM´s recently imposed Standard Licence Condition, SLC 4F,with obligations to meet target connection design/planning response rates and to - udit and report on achievements each year.
