Objective. To determine the responses of the trunk muscles to fatigue during sustained, isometric axial torque exertions.

Design. Electromyographic (EMG) amplitude and frequency parameters were used to investigate the effects of prolonged contractions on the recruitment patterns of trunk muscles, with special emphasis on those antagonistic and stabilizing muscles not contributing directly to the required axial torque.

Background. High levels of muscle coactivity have been observed during axial torque generation in the trunk. It has been suggested that this serves to enhance postural stability of the spine during potentially injurious twist exertions. Muscle fatigue decreases force-generating capacity but the resulting effects on muscle recruitment, and the subsequent consequences for postural stability, have not been explored previously during the production of axial torques in the spine.

Methods. Eleven male and 11 female subjects maintained an isometric axial torque exertion to the left (40% of maximum) until volitional exhaustion in an upright standing posture. Maximum axial torques were measured before and after the trial. The average EMG amplitude (AEMG) and mean power frequency (MPF) of seven bilateral trunk muscles (representing agonists, antagonists and trunk stabilizers) were continuously monitored throughout the trial.

Results. The average decrease in maximum torque was 18.5% and the average endurance time was 163 ± 52 s. Evidence of muscle fatigue was provided by significant MPF decreases in 12 of the 14 muscles monitored (P < 0.05) with a overall average decrease of 20.4%. There was a significant increase in AEMG with time for 11 of the 14 muscles monitored (P < 0.05). These increases in activation were linked to increases in muscle force for most of the antagonistic and stabilizing muscles. Gender effects were rarely observed.

Conclusions. Fatigue results in an change in the recruitment patterns of trunk muscles. Muscles serving as antagonists and trunk stabilizers during prolonged axial twist exertions increased their force levels in response to fatigue.
