Objective. The objective of this study is to illustrate the low accuracy of two-dimensional (2-D) X-ray projection methods for the quantification of the three-dimensional (3-D) shoulder motions.

Background. The traditional method for the quantification of the gleno-humeral motion is by means of 2-D X-ray recording. The motion was characterized by the scapulo-humeral rhythm: the ratio of the nett humeral elevation over nett scapular rotation. The method was based on the quantification of the planar projection of the spatial positions of X-ray dense structures of the scapula. The deformations introduced by the central projection method, a feature of X-ray projection, cannot be compensated for by calibration: the position of the scapula with respect to the camera setting is unknown, and skeletal landmarks of the scapula cannot uniquely be identified. The transformation from 3-D orientations to 2-D angles will, therefore, be inaccurate.

Methods. A 2-D X-ray projection of the scapula during a typical arm abduction was simulated. The 3-D motion was obtained by means of palpation and subsequent digitization of skeletal landmarks of the scapula. The 3-D positions of the recorded landmarks were projected on a plane by a simulation based on the parameters of the X-ray equipment. The scapulo-humeral rhythm was calculated for the different scapular landmarks, and for the orientation of the subject with respect to the projection axis. The results were compared with previous published scapulo-humeral rhythms.

Results. The scapulo-humeral rhythm depends both on the choice of the skeletal landmarks, used to quantify the scapular rotations, and on the orientation of the subject in the X-ray setting. The full range of results obtained from earlier published experiments could be obtained from a simulation based on a single 3-D arm abduction.

Conclusions. The 2-D scapulo-humeral rhythm, obtained from planar X-ray projection, is an inaccurate parameter to define the scapular motions.
