Objective.  To know the effects of stress shielding on the biomechanical properties of collagen fascicles obtained from in situ frozen patellar tendons (an autograft model).

Design. Collagen fascicles of approximately 300 μm in diameter were obtained from in situ frozen rabbit patellar tendons and also from in situ frozen and stress-shielded ones, and their mechanical properties and fibroblast density were determined.

Background. Stress shielding changes the mechanical properties of in situ frozen patellar tendons in which there exist no fibroblasts. The mechanisms of this phenomenon have not been studied well.

Method. Patellar tendons of both in situ frozen group and in situ frozen and stress-shielded group were frozen in situ by liquid nitrogen to kill fibroblasts. Then, in the in situ frozen and stress-shielded group, no tension was applied to the tendons for 2, 3, and 6 weeks, while normal tension was applied to the tendons of the in situ frozen group. Tensile properties of the collagen fascicles obtained from these tendons were determined using a microtensile tester, and were compared to the collagen fascicles from non-frozen, stress-shielded patellar tendons.

Results. Tangent modulus and tensile strength of collagen fascicles from the in situ frozen and stress-shielded group progressively decreased with the time of stress shielding; however, these decreases were much smaller than those of the fascicles obtained from non-frozen, stress-shielded tendons. Although there were few fibroblasts in the patellar tendon of the in situ frozen and stress-shielded group at 2 weeks, the modulus and strength of the fascicles from the posterior portion were significantly lower than those in the in situ frozen group. In addition, the reduction of strength caused by stress shielding was much smaller in collagen fascicles than in bulk patellar tendons.

Conclusion. The mechanical properties of collagen fascicles in in situ frozen tendons (an autograft model) are affected by stress shielding even under acellular condition.
