Objective. Develop a comprehensive gender-specific database of trunk muscle moment-arms across multiple levels of the lower thoracic and lumbar spine, determine if gender differences exist across the different vertebral levels, and develop prediction equations for the moment-arms as a function of external anthropometric measures.

Design. This study quantified trunk muscle moment-arms relative to the spine from T8 to S1 of male and female spine loading muscles.

Background. Knowledge of trunk muscle geometry is important for biomechanical modeling of the low back and for understanding of spinal loading. However, there currently is a lack of comprehensive data regarding the moment-arms of the female spine loading muscles. Additionally, little is known regarding gender differences in moment-arms for the same muscles.

Methods. Magnetic resonance imaging scans through the vertebral bodies from T8 through S1 were performed on 20 females and 10 males. Moment-arms in the coronal and sagittal plane between the muscle centroid and vertebral body centroid were recorded at each vertebral level. Linear regression techniques taking into account anthropometric measures were utilized to develop prediction equations for the moment-arms for each muscle.

Results. Anthropometric measures were better predictors of coronal plane moment-arms than sagittal plane moment-arms for both genders. Measures consisting of height and weight were consistent predictors of female moment-arms. Measures about the xyphoid process and combinations of height and weight were consistent predictors of coronal plane moment-arms for males at several lower lumbar levels. Males exhibited larger moment-arms than for females, for most muscles at most levels.

Conclusions. Trunk muscle moment-arms of females and males are different, and should be considered in the development of biomechanical models of the torso. Similar to other studies, external anthropometric measures were better predictors of coronal plane moment-arms than sagittal plane moment-arms.
