Objective. The purpose of this study was to quantitatively examine the flexibility of sprained ankles using an arthrometer device and compare the differences in flexibility between ankles following the first sprains and ankles with repeated severe sprains and chronic symptoms.

Design. A retrospective in vivo study was used.

Background. Many in vitro studies have demonstrated a significant role of joint flexibility in determining mechanical laxity of human cadaveric ankles after sectioning of the lateral ligaments, but few in vivo studies have used the technique to provide objective measurement on the sprained ankles. Furthermore, there is a lack of extensive studies that compared the difference in the ankle flexibility between ankles following the first sprain and ankles with multiple repeated severe sprains and chronic symptoms.

Methods. A total of 27 subjects with unilateral ankle sprains participated in this study. The subjects were divided into a first injury group (group A, n=12) and a chronic symptom group (group B, n=15) based on the history of their ankle injuries. The ankle flexibility in anterior drawer and inversion/eversion tests was measured in both ankles of the subjects using an arthrometer device, the ankle flexibility tester – a six-degree-of-freedom instrumented linkage used for measurements of applied forces/moments and resultant rotations and/or translations of the ankle joint complex. The difference in ankle flexibility between the injured ankle and the contralateral intact side was analyzed.

Results. The flexibility in anterior drawer test of the injured ankles significantly increased compared to the intact ankles of the same individual in group B, but the same difference was not significant in group A. There were more subjects in group B (46.6%) than in group A (33.3%) who showed a sign of mechanical laxity in their injured ankles.

Conclusions. The results indicated that the approach with measurement of ankle flexibility may be a potential tool used to detect the mechanical laxity in the sprained ankles. A tendency was found that patients with multiple ankle sprains and chronic symptoms had a higher occurrence rate of mechanical laxity. The result of the present study may also be interpreted that the ankles with mechanical laxity had higher risk of re-injury and leading to chronic symptoms.
