Objective. To test the hypothesis that hydrostatic pressure directly affects the synthesis of collagen and proteoglycan by intervertebral disc cells.

Design. By the use of pressure vessels, hydrostatic pressure was applied to intervertebral disc cells cultured in alginate.

Background. The influence of compression (both hydrostatic and axial) on chondrocyte metabolism was examined in a number of earlier studies. However, in most of these studies, articular cartilage, not intervertebral disc was used, and in none of these was hydrostatic pressure applied to intervertebral disc cells cultured in alginate.

Methods. Fresh cells were harvested from the lumbar intervertebral discs of dogs. Before their suspension in an alginate gel system, the cells were plated and expanded until they reached confluence. Then, by use of the alginate gel system, the cells were exposed (for up to 9 days) to specific values of hydrostatic pressure inside two stainless steel pressure vessels. One vessel was kept at 0.35 MPa and the other at atmospheric pressure (approximately 0.1 MPa). The effects of 0.35 MPa were compared against atmospheric pressure by measuring the incorporation of [3H]-proline and [35S]-sulfate into collagen and proteoglycans, respectively, for the anulus cells and nucleus cells separately, and by determining whether this incorporation was reflected by changes in the levels of mRNA for aggrecan and Types I and II collagen.

Results. Proteoglycan synthesis was inhibited at 0.35 MPa as compared to atmospheric pressure for both the nucleus and anulus cells, whereas collagen synthesis was stimulated in the nucleus cells, but inhibited in the anulus cells. The mRNA levels of collagen 1A and collagen 2A decreased in the anulus but showed a differential response in the nucleus (collagen 1A increased, while collagen 2A decreased). The mRNA levels for aggrecan core protein decreased in the anulus and increased in the nucleus.

Conclusion. Hydrostatic pressure directly affects the synthesis of collagen and proteoglycan by the intervertebral disc cells.
