Currently, most products are designed to support their users using them consciously. In fact, there are four stages of learning according to the relationship of consciousness and competency: 1) unconscious incompetence, 2) conscious incompetence, 3) conscious competence, and 4) unconscious competence. The third stage is considered the most perfect due to users´ competency and consciousness whilst a task is being performed. As a consequence, products are designed by using feed forward, a signal sent from products to users, to a different sense other than the one engaged in a current task. This is deemed wholly suitable for users of the third stage. However, after having continuously performed a task, users eventually proceed to the fourth stage, that of unconscious competence user. Products designed to use feed forward signals at this point, might not be the most effective means of alerting unconscious competence users. This study, then examines whether feedback or feed forward is better suited in terms of speed to alert user response to signals. The methodology of this study uses subject performance measurement. Subjects are asked to perform two tests the first was one normally done unconsciously, that of simply seating oneself. The second task requires, through the performance of a repetitive act, (that of moving two red beans per time using chopsticks) drawing away the attention as much as possible, from subjects in their seats. The assumption is that subjects would adjust their posture accordingly (draw nearer to the red beans) when improved concentration was needed to move them and not to pay attention to whether they are seated correctly or not. During the test, both feedback and feed forward signals alerted subjects to control distance between their eyes and the beans themselves. Results reveal feedback was better in alerting subjects when controlling distance and returning back to the original posture, in terms of speed of response. The explanation is that r- - esponse to feedback signal happens immediately. With feedback, the subject reacts physically at the body part, later sending a message to the brain explaining what has just occurred. Meanwhile, response to feed forward occurs only after the brain has sent commands to the body part it wishes to move. The objective of this study is neither to provide nor to confirm the appropriate use of the feedback signal, only to establish certain factors and their intricate relationship, which can be used to inform the design of feedback as a signal within products. Feedback signals themselves cannot completely alert unconscious competence users; however, kinesthetic ability of the tasks should be taken into consideration.
