Studies of the adaptive skeletal response to mechanical loading require appropriate animal models. Two new approaches involve the nonsurgical application of loads to either the ulna or tibia of rats. Both of these approaches require the loading of bone through adjacent soft tissues, and thus the tissue viscoelasticity might affect the way load is transferred to the bone. The objective of this study was to characterize the mechanical strain in the rat tibia or ulna during applied loading at different frequencies. For the rat ulna model, loading was applied to the ulnae of four adult, female rats as a haversine waveform at frequencies of 1, 2, 5, 10, and 20 Hz and peak loads of 5, 10, 15, and 20 N. Mechanical strain was measured on the medial and lateral ulnar surfaces using single element strain gauges. For the rat tibia model, four-point bending loads were applied to the right tibiae of seven rats at frequencies of 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, and 20 Hz and peak loads of 30, 40, 50, and 60 N. Mechanical strain was measured on the lateral tibial surface at 5 mm proximal to the tibiofibular junction. We found that peak strains were linearly proportional to applied load, but decreased logarithmically as loading frequency was increased, indicating a significant viscoelastic effect in the soft tissues surrounding the ulnocarpal joint and in the soft tissues surrounding the tibia shaft. The viscoelastic response of the ulna and tibia tends to “filter out” high-frequency loading components and, as a result, the rat loading systems act as a low-pass filter. Consequently, any experiment designed to test the effect of loading frequency on bone formation in the rat ulna and tibia should employ progressively larger loads at higher loading frequencies to guarantee a consistent peak strain magnitude in the bone. The filtering effect of the ulna loading system is illustrated by an analysis of the strain waveforms from the recent study by Mosley and Lanyon (Bone 23:313–318; 1998) that was designed to evaluate the effect of strain rate on bone formation.
