Every research describes a problem and tries to provide answers to questions raised. The focus of attention in every university is the methods of teaching and evaluating the student. Security is the first step in execution of examinations. In some countries, technology and online exams are always associated with security concerns. According to the research I conducted into virtual universities, I considered the following security framework for holding online examinations: 1. Use of 360&#176; camera with capability of taking IP 2. Installing special secure software for exams 3. Connection to central server using VPN 4. Defining username and password for each exam 5. Asking the exam´s questions on a one by one basis 6. Specifying a tine limit for answering each question This research has as its objective creating a security framework, which could raise the security of the exam to some extent using new solutions, and considering our users will students and we have their record, we can make sure that the intended student in by the system during the exam by asking a number of random questions in the course of exam, in such manner that if a number of questions are answered correctly, we will presume that the genuine examinee is by the system. On the other hand, we can give a pre-exam in a quite confidential manner and estimate the extent of fraud and lie of each user on its basis. Moreover, in providing a security framework for the exam, we tried to first base the framework on itil and then provide a new framework for it by adding items specific to the online exam. It should be noted that placing special item required by the exam within the itil framework by-itself results in management of security of the whole exam. After establishing itil model, we will use standard 27001 and base the exam on 11 principal sections of this standard, especially on access control and physical and environmental security section, with the latter being noticed for the first time in the el- - ectronic examination.
