Objective: To evaluate and compare the long-term aesthetic and functional results of surgical and orthodontic treatment in patients with cleft palate and unilateral cleft lip, palate, and alveolus.
Design: 30 patients with unilateral cleft lip, palate, and alveolus and 30 patients with isolated cleft palate, mean age of 18.9 years, were evaluated by cephalometric and model analysis a mean of 1.5 years after orthodontic treatment. In each group the surgical treatment has been similar.
Results: Model analysis: The sum of every mesiodistal tooth diameter in the maxilla and in the mandible was recorded according to the Bolton analysis. Twenty patients with unilateral cleft lip, palate and alveolus had relatively large upper dental arches and nine had relatively large lower dental arches. Twenty-two patients with cleft palates had large upper dental arches and seven had large mandibular arches. Eleven patients with unilateral cleft lip, palate, and alveolus and 18 patients with cleft palate had a negative space supply (the sum of the mesiodistal tooth diameters compared with the sagittal length of the alveolar ridge) in the region of the lateral teeth. All patients had persistent transverse space deficits that were increased on the side of the cleft in patients with cleft lip, palate, and alveolus. These unilateral transversal space deficits were recorded in 22 patients with unilateral cleft lip, palate, and alveolus and in 8 patients with isolated cleft palate. Sagittal measurements were reduced in 26 patients with unilateral cleft lip, palate, and alveolus and in 23 patients with cleft palate alone. The alveolar midline of the maxilla and the mandible were displaced in 25 patients with unilateral cleft lip, palate, and alveolus and in 19 patients with isolated cleft palate. Lateral cephalometric analysis: The lateral cephalograms taken at the same time as the models showed a mean SNA of 76.8째 and a NL-NSL angle of 8.7째, indications of a tendency towards maxillary retrognathia in patients with unilateral cleft lip, palate, and alveolus. Patients with cleft palate had a mean SNA of 79.6째 and NL-NSL angle of 8.1째. The anterior facial vertical index was within normal limits in patients with cleft lip, palate, and alveolus (44% vs 56%). An anterior facial height index of 42% compared with 58% in patients with isolated cleft palate indicated a slight reduction in midface height with an increase in the lower face as a consequence.
Conclusion: Orthodontic and surgical treatment can result in satisfactory results on model analysis. However, there is specific growth impairment of the maxilla 1.5 years after termination of orthodontic treatment and this influences the final cephalometric analysis, particularly in patients with cleft lip, palate, and alveolus. 

