Objective: To explore the difference speciality identity and achievement motivation in gender, training type, degree type, speciality nature and the relationship between speciality identity and achievement motivation, personality of medical postgraduate in Jilin and supply the empirical support to education executives in development of training program. Methods: Using speciality identity questionnaires (SIP), achievement motivation scale(AMS), big five inventory (BFI), survey and analyze 415 master´s and doctoral students in three medical schools in Jilin. Results: Speciality identity of medical postgraduate is statistically significant in gender, speciality nature. Achievement motivation of medical postgraduate is only statistically significant in gender. There is significant positive correlation on factors of speciality identity compared with achievement motivation and factors of personality. The introduction of new variables is significant contribution to speciality identity after controlling the demography variables in hierarchical regression analysis. Openness to experience, extraversion, conscien tiousness of the personality are significantly increase the intensity of explanation of the regression equation. Achievement motivation&#215;conscien tiousness significantly reduces the intensity of explanation of the regression equation. Conclusion: The difference between speciality identity and achievement motivation of medical postgraduate in gender, speciality nature is caused by congnitive gactors. Speciality identity and motivation of success are closely related. Speciality identity and motivation of avoiding failure are unrelated. Speciality identity and personality are reciprocal causation. The more their openness to experience, exploring attitude and the better self-confident, vitality, responsibility, the medical postgraduates have the stronger their speciality identity. The factor of personality as the third variable indirectly plays remarkable regulat- ng effect in speciality identity and achievement motivation.
