During the last decade a number of advanced Information and Communication Technology (ICT) solutions have been developed to assist in the management of business processes and working environments. Radio Frequency Identification Device (RFID) tagging technology and mobile computing are two such technologies which have been adopted for use in hybrid systems because they can monitor and manage industrial health, safety and welfare activities. Set within a construction plant and machinery context, this research paper presents some critical reflections for addressing soft issues pertaining to customer-focused sitesafety applications. The objective being to embed soft issues within the very design of emerging technology applications, for proactive health and safety management system. While emerging disruptive technologies have opened a pavilion for growth and innovation for site safety,the optimum diffusion of these technologies have clearly reiterated the need for soft-factors to be addressed at a broader perspective. This research thus endeavors to address industrial sitesafety risks by rendering critical reflections of the soft issues capitalized through scenario planning. Soft factors present an area that requires further in depth research in the domain of social informatics, ergonomics and industrial psychology. These critical reflections reside in the domain of system effectiveness, proactive nature of the system, practicality of the system, system usability and financial feasibility. Scenario-planning in these domains is expected to enhance the ICT diffusion and optimum the utilization of emerging technologies so as to minimize risks through realistic-proactive-system for plant (and site safety). This would boost the practical and proactive ICT based systems with far-reaching advantages that could for example help to reduce accidents on construction sites. The design and operation of this hybrid system is entitled SightSafety and is based on end-user needs identif- ed through requirement analysis and scenario generation.
