Objective: Case study of a CNS impairment lacking in presumptive cause; case presents with a clinical phenotype encompassing
multiple differently expressed and combined symptoms, as well as a subtle skin defect. Materials and methods: A 6-year-old male
with apparently isolated mental delay, speech delay, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, epilepsy, and subtle and insignificant
skin dyschromias. The patient underwent a systematic evaluation, including clinical history; medical, neurological and ophthalmologic
examinations. Skin, teeth, nails, hair and sudation were examined for defects. Routine laboratory tests for blood, urine, were
performed. The proband had thyroid function tests, electrocardiography, genitourinary system and abdominal examinations. Special
examinations pertaining to mental performance, biochemistry, chromosome studies, imaging and electrodiagnostic studies, and
skin biopsy were also performed. Results: Investigators ruled out genetic syndromes, congenital infections, fetal deprivation, perinatal
insults, intrauterine exposure to drug abuse, and postnatal events such as CNS infections as possible common causes of brain
impairment. Being all further test negative, the patient exhibited an ultrastructural defect of the skin, identical to that previously
described [Buoni S, Zannolli R, de Santi MM, Macucci F, Hayek J, Orsi A et al. Neurocutaneous syndrome with mental delay,
autism, blockage in intracellular vesicular trafficking and melanosome defects. Eur J Neurol 2006;13:842–51], suggesting that some
cell compartments, such as rough endoplasmic reticulum, lysosomes, Golgi apparatus, and the vesicular zone (racket) of Birbeck
granules, sharing similar components, can be altered, resulting in a common defect in cell trafficking, associated to melanosome
defects. Conclusions: This new devasting, ultrastructural phenotype accompanied by apparently unspecific and mixed neurological
symptoms should represent a future challenge to finally discover the pathogenesis of many childhood CNS symptoms, that currently
seem to lack any apparent cause
