Direct assessment of bone competence in vivo is not possible, hence, it is inevitable to predict it using appropriate simulation techniques. Although accurate estimates of bone competence can be obtained from micro-finite element models (μFE), it is at the expense of large computer efforts. In this study, we investigated the application of structural idealizations to represent individual trabeculae by single elements. The objective was to implement and validate this technique.
We scanned 42 human vertebral bone samples (10 mm height, 8 mm diameter) with micro-computed tomography using a 20 μm resolution. After scanning, direct mechanical testing was performed. Topological classification and dilation-based algorithms were used to identify individual rods and plates. Two FE models were created for each specimen. In the first one, each rod-like trabecula was modeled with one thickness-matched beam; each plate-like trabecula was modeled with several beams. From a simulated compression test, assuming one isotropic tissue modulus for all elements, the apparent stiffness was calculated. After reducing the voxel size to 40 μm, a second FE model was created using a standard voxel conversion technique. Again, one tissue modulus was assumed for all elements in all models, and a compression test was simulated.
Bone volume fraction ranged from 3.7% to 19.5%; Young's moduli from 43 MPa to 649 MPa. Both models predicted measured apparent moduli equally well (R2 = 0.85), and were in excellent agreement with each other (R2 = 0.97). Tissue modulus was estimated at 9.0 GPa and 10.7 GPa for the beam FE and voxel FE models, respectively. On average, the beam models were solved in 219 s, reducing CPU usage up to 1150-fold as compared to 40 μm voxel FE models. Relative to 20 μm voxel models 10,000-fold reductions can be expected. The presented beam FE model is an abstraction of the intricate real trabecular structure using simple cylindrical beam elements. Nevertheless, it enabled an accurate prediction of global mechanical properties of microstructural bone. The strong reduction in CPU time provides the means to increase throughput, to analyze multiple loading configuration and to increase sample size, without increasing computational costs. With upcoming in vivo high-resolution imaging systems, this model has the potential to become a standard for mechanical characterization of bone.

