Renewable energy sources are slowly but surely supplementing conventional sources of energy. These energy sources create a large number of micro-grids which become a part of the main grid. Smart meters are essential components in smart micro-grids and smart grids. Together they form a complex system which has become today an attractive area of research world-wide in view of enormous benefits of reliability and safety of power supply economically. Several studies in smart meter applications have shown that in residential buildings, energy consumption can be reduced up to 15% with better management. For this, a non-intrusive appliance load monitoring (NIALM) technique has been advocated which enables appliance identification to help better energy management. The identification is done using load signatures with appropriate algorithm. Several features of load signatures ranging from voltage and current profiles (steady states and transients) to a plethora of features such as active power (P) and reactive power (Q), power factor (pf), harmonic components (h), magnitudes of h (mh), current waveform (CW), eigen values, switching transient waveform, instantaneous admittance waveform, etc have been used in NIALM. The algorithms used vary from a `single algorithm´ to `multiple algorithms´, the latter used in `Committee Decision Mechanism´ (CDM) in which majority of `votes´ (i.e., agreement), `cast´ by each of the algorithms, decides the final result of appliances identified. This scenario presents a serious difficulty with regard to choice of features and algorithms, besides the possibility of increasing the hardware and software costs of smart meters. The motivation for the study in this paper is provided by this scenario. The basic objective of this paper is to investigate the possibility of including only a limited number of features as load signature of appliances, and the use of only a single algorithm to effectively implement NIALM without any ambiguity. Results - f our study so far indicate that generally only four features of P, Q, h and mh are sufficient for detection of appliances in operation; however, in some cases (~&gt;10%), the additional feature, CW, may be needed for final identification.. The experiments conducted so far yielded unambiguous identification of appliances and the results are encouraging enough for possible use in practice for residential loads only.
