Recently, special types of routing protocols are designed for sensor networks. Almost all of these routing protocols have considered the energy efficiency as the ultimate objective in order to maximize the lifetime of the whole network. The different types of routing protocols available in WSN are data centric, hierarchical, and location-based and on demand routing protocols. Low-Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH) protocol is one of the best hierarchical clustering protocols with probabilistic model to manage the energy consumption of WSN. However, LEACH uses global information without considering the local information i.e. the residual energy of each node for CH election process. Hence, Deterministic Energy-efficient Clustering protocol (DEC), a deterministic model is developed by using clustering scheme to manage and organize the WSN with mobile scenario. This protocol promises a better election of cluster-heads based on residual energy information and it is more energy efficient than LEACH protocols. Ad hoc on demand Distance Vector (AODV) is another routing protocol used in sensor network to support mobility. AODV is also on demand routing protocol. However, AODV do not provide multipath loop free and has link disjoint path. Hence, Ad hoc On-demand Multipath Distance Vector (AOMDV) is developed for WSN to guarantee loop freedom and disjointness of alternate paths. Frequent route discovery and route failure is occurred in AOMDV protocols due to the involvement of repeated mobile nodes without checking the energy levels of those nodes for packet transmission. To reduce the route failures occurred by the usage of nodes with reduced energy, energy aware ad hoc on-demand multipath distance vector routing protocol (E-AOMDV) is developed by incorporating energy aware concept in AOMDV protocol to increase the network performance. In this paper, the performance analysis namely residual energy of DEC protocol is examined for various packet length and nodes. Del- very ratio analysis of EAOMDV protocol is also done in this paper for various simulation times and nodes. The simulation results shows that DEC has better performance than LEACH and also E-AOMDV has better performance than AOMDV.
