The paper purpose is to dignify some aspects regarding the calculus model and technical solutions for multistage suborbital launcher for testing (SLT) used to test spatial equipment and scientific measurements. The calculus methodology consists in numerical simulation of SLT evolution for different start conditions. The launcher model presented will be with six DOF and variable mass. At this item, as novelty of the work we will use the rotation angles for describe the kinematical equations of the movement. The results analysed will be the flight parameters and ballistic performances. The discussions area will focus around the technical possibility to realize sounding multi-stage rocket recycling military rocket engine From technical point of view, the paper is focused on national project &#8220;Suborbital Launcher for Testing&#8221; (SLT), which is based on a hybrid propulsion and control systems, obtained through an original design. Therefore, while classical suborbital sounding rockets are unguided and they use as propulsion solid fuel motor having an uncontrolled ballistic flight, SLT project is introducing a different approach, by proposing the creation of a guided suborbital launcher, which is basically a satellite launcher at a smaller scale, containing its main subsystems. This is why the project itself can be considered an intermediary step in the development of a wider range of launching system based on a hybrid propulsion system technology, which may have a major impact in the future European launching program. The project, as it is shown in the title, has two major objectives: first, a short term objective, which consists in obtaining a suborbital launching system which will be able to go into service in a predictable period of time, and a long term objective that consists in the development and testing of some unconventional sub-systems which will be integrated later in the satellite launcher as a part of the European space program. This is why the - echnical content of the project must be carried out beyond the range of the existing suborbital vehicle programs towards the current technological necessities in the space field, especially the European one.
