Objective. Finding an optimal soldering system for a titanium prosthesis has become increasingly important with the successful introduction of titanium and titanium alloys to dentistry. This study examined the effect of corrosion on the strength of the soldered joints of pure titanium and Ti---6Al---4V alloys joined using various solders.

Methods. Commercially pure titanium and Ti---6Al---4V alloy rods (2 mm in diameter; 25 mm long) were soldered in an argon atmosphere using four solders: two kinds of titanium-based solder, a gold-based solder, and a silver-based solder. Tensile strengths were examined before or after immersion treatments. Specimens were immersed in either a 0.9% NaCl or 1.0% lactic acid solution held at 35°C for 3 and 8 wk. The amounts of various metal elements released were determined by atomic absorption photospectroscopy. The natural potentials and potentiodynamic polarization behavior of the soldered specimens in 0.9% NaCl or 1.0% lactic acid were determined by a computer-assisted corrosion measurement system. The results were analyzed by ANOVA and Student's t-test.

Results. The cp-titanium and Ti---6Al---4V samples soldered with titanium-based solders exhibited tensile strengths of 300–400 MPa and were not significantly affected by immersion in either solution (no significant difference at p < 0.05). The strengths of both the cp-titanium and titanium alloy specimens soldered with gold-based solder were significantly lower than for any of the other specimens and were affected by immersion in the 0.9% NaCl solution (p < 0.01). The cp-titanium and Ti---6Al---4V specimens that were soldered with titanium-based solders did not show any transpassive regions or breakdown in the natural electrode potential range. On the contrary, the specimens soldered with gold-based and silver-based solders showed transpassive regions or breakdown potentials at less than 0 mV in 0.9% NaCl solution.

Significance. It is recommended that titanium-based solder be employed for titanium and titanium alloys.
