According to The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2012, a publication of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, five Asian nations topped the world ranking of mariculture producers in 2010. In order, they were China, India, Vietnam, Indonesia, and Bangladesh. Asia´s maricultural production was 1,799,101 tons in 1970, accounting for 70.1% of the world total. Since then, maricultural production in Asia has continued to grow as a percentage of the world total year by year. In 2010, Asian production reached 53,301,157 tons, about 30 times the 1970 level and 89.0% of global production. World production by maricultural environment shows that about 62.0% comes from freshwater, 7.9% from brackish water, and 30.1% from seawater. Since 2000, the trend is for freshwater production to increase slightly and seawater production to decline slightly. Given this background, promoting mariculture to expand exports of fish and shellfish is a key issue of national development plans in Indonesia, the world´s fourth largest maricultural producer. However, maricultural technology is still in the development stage, and production is not stable, plagued as it is with problems like sudden, large-scale die-offs. Maricultural technology can be broadly divided into egg and hatchling production technology and cultivating technology. In Indonesia, egg and hatchling production technology has been under development for high-added-value milkfish and grouper through the &#8220;Project for Development of Egg and Hatchling Production Technology for Many Species,&#8221; begun in 1994. Since 2003, organizations such as a national maricultural research center have been transferring that technology to the private sector. On the other hand, cultivating technology, which concerns raising fish from juvenile to adult stages, is still under development. Here, one issue is the establishment of maricultural technology that enables stable production immune to regime shifts. The- authors have begun the observation of the marine environment to establish maricultural technology in Indonesia with the objective of enabling stable production and distribution of safe and reliable fish and shellfish into the future.
