Objective:  The aim of the study was to evaluate the effect of some acidic conditioners on dentin morphology, molecular composition and collagen conformation in situ.

Methods: Smear layer-covered dentin specimens prepared from third molars immediately after extraction were imaged by tapping mode AFM and analyzed by MIR-FTIR spectroscopy. The same specimens were subjected to conditioning treatments with CA Agent (Kuraray), Scotchbond Etchant (3M Dental Products) and Scotchbond MP Etchant (3M Dental Products) gels and then imaged and analyzed again. The extent of dentin decalcification at the uppermost 2 μm region was calculated from the percentage reduction in the -PO4/amide I peak area ratio of conditioned specimens relative to their individual smear layer-covered references. These results were compared by ANOVA and Scheffe´statistical analyses. The conformational changes of dentin type I collagen at the region were studied qualitatively by deconvoluting the amide I bands of MIR-FTIR spectra and assigning the band components to carbonyl hydrogen bonding states related to the α-helix structure.

Results: All the conditioners removed the smear layer, funneled the tubules, increased the intertubular roughness and contaminated the dentin surfaces with residues from irreversibly adsorbed thickening agents. Conditioned dentin surfaces showed a reduction in orthophosphates and carbonates and an increase in amide I, II and III groups. CA Agent manifested a significantly lower extent of dentin decalcification than Scotchbond etchants (p < 0.05). Collagen conformational changes involved a decrease in intermolecular hydrogen bonded amide I carbonyls associated with the α-helix structure and enhancement of imide carbonyls hydrogen bonded to water, which suggest collagen denaturation.

Significance: Apart from dentin decalcification, the acidic conditioners induced considerable changes on dentin collagen conformation mostly associated with denaturation processes. In addition, irreversibly adsorbed residual thickeners substantially modified the morphology and composition of dentin surfaces. These findings show the complex interaction pathways between conditioners and dentin surfaces and the great potential of modern in situ imaging and analysis techniques in probing these interactions.
