Objective:  The aim of this study was to evaluate the flexure strength under static and cyclic loading and the fracture toughness under static loading of six restorative ceramic materials. Specifically the intent was to compare four leucite (K2O·Al2O3·4SiO2) strengthened feldspathic (pressable) porcelains (OA, OI, E, and FP) to a low fusing feldspathic porcelain (F) and an experimental (EC) lithium disilicate containing ceramic.

Methods: All materials were tested as a control in air and distilled water (without aging) and after three months aging in air or distilled water to determine flexure strength and fracture toughness. A staircase approach was used to determine the cyclic flexure strength. EDS and SEM analysis were conducted on the polished and fracture surfaces.

Results: The mean flexure strength for the controls in air and water (without aging or cyclic loading) ranged from 67 to 99 MPa, except the experimental ceramic that was twice as strong with a mean flexure strength of 191–205 MPa. For the mean fracture toughness, the range was 1.1–1.9 MPa/m0.5 with the experimental ceramic being 2.7 MPa/m0.5. The effect of testing in water and aging for three months caused a moderate reduction in the mean flexure strength (6–17%), and a moderate to severe reduction in the mean fracture toughness (5–39%). The largest decrease (15–60%) in mean flexure strength was observed when the samples were subjected to cyclic loading.

Significance: The lithium disilicate containing ceramic had a significantly higher flexure strength and fracture toughness when compared to the four pressable leucite strengthened ceramics and the low fusing conventional porcelain. All of the leucite containing pressable ceramics did provide an increase in mean flexure strength (17–19%) and mean fracture toughness (3–64%) over the conventional feldspathic porcelain. Further, the influence of testing environment and loading conditions implies that these ceramic materials in the oral cavity might be susceptible to cyclic fatigue, resulting in a significant decrease in the survival time of all-ceramic restorations.
