Objective.  The corrosion of high-Pd dental alloys, depending on their composition, is postulated to be associated with dealloying and electroformation. The aim of this study was to obtain additional information to support these postulations.

Methods. The corrosion characteristics of two commercial high-Pd alloys, Naturelle (79Pd–10Cu–2Au–9Ga wt%) and Rx 91 (54Pd–37Ag–9Sn), and their elemental components were evaluated in a phosphated buffer saline (PBS) solution. Indium, a common element in high-Pd alloys, was also included. The corrosion characteristics measured for each material were the 24 h open circuit potential (OCP) and the potentiodynamic anodic polarization curve. Additionally, the surface composition of the two alloys, before and after immersion corrosion in PBS for 2 months, was analyzed by X-ray photo electron spectroscopy (XPS).

Results. Of the pure metals, Ga had the most electroactive OCP followed in order by In, Sn, Cu, Ag, Au, and Pd. The anodic polarization data showed all base metals to be unstable in PBS. The electroformation of AgCl was evidenced in the polarization curve of pure Ag. Both electrochemical characteristics of the PdCu-based alloy were very similar to that of pure Pd. The PdAg-based alloy displayed corrosion behavior resembling that of Ag. XPS data showed that the corrosion of the PdCu-based alloy was associated with a decrease in surface content of Cu and Ga but an increase in Pd and Au. The PdAg-based alloy surface during corrosion showed a decrease in Sn, an increase in Ag, and an unaltered Pd content. The behavior of the PdCu-based alloy is attributed to the operation of a galvanic interaction that causes dissolution of base metals and surface enrichment with primarily Pd. Dealloying, Ag-enrichment, and AgCl formation are thought to have contributed to the observed behavior of the PdAg-based alloy. These mechanisms are consistent with data from published ion release studies.

Significance. The allergenic potential of any Pd alloy is dependent on its propensity to develop a Pd-rich surface and thus release Pd+2 ions. The present study, though limited, has shown that electrochemical characteristics, namely OCP and polarization curves, can be used to identify such alloys. Further studies are warranted to evaluate the widespread applicability of these characteristics in distinguishing between Pd alloys that are biologically safe and those that are not.
