Objective:  The use of adequate target cells for cytotoxicity testing of dental restorative materials has often been experimentally assessed with respect to the clinical relevance of the test results. In the present study, the responses in primary bovine dental papilla-derived cells (pulp cells) were compared with those in transformed dental papilla-derived cell lines and L929 mouse fibroblasts after exposure to various dental resin compounds.

Methods: Primary bovine dental papilla-derived cells (CPC), tCPC B (CPC cells transformed with SV40 T-antigen), tCPC E (CPC cells transformed with E6/E7 oncogen), and L929 mouse fibroblast cells were exposed to various compounds of dental resin materials for 24 h, and cytotoxicity was determined using the MTT assay. Bis-GMA, UDMA, 1,6 hexane diol dimethacrylate (HDDM), TEGDMA, HEMA, MMA, camphorquinone (CQ), bisphenol A (BPA), and glycidyl methacrylate (GMA) were tested. Concentrations leading to 50% cell survival (TC50 values) were calculated from fitted dose-response curves.

Results: The simple ranking of the cytotoxic effects of the dental resin compounds in the four cell types was identical, and TC50 values determined in L929 cells here were consistent with findings by other authors using continuous cell lines. However, the concentrations of the resin compounds necessary for eliciting cytotoxic responses in the various cells were clearly different. The analyses of TC50 values of the resin compounds revealed a linear correlation between cell lines, and the overall sensitivities increased as follows: CPC=tCPC B<tCPC E<L929.

Significance: The low sensitivities of primary cells and transformed tCPC B cells compared with the continuous L929 cell line and the transformed tCPC E cells indicates the presence of specific structural and functional properties relevant in vivo. The differences between the transformed tCPC B and tCPC E cells may indicate modifications of cellular functions caused by the different transformation processes.
