Objectives. Titanium-ceramic restorations are currently used in spite of the pending problem of titanium-ceramic bonding, which has only been partially solved. In addition, some titanium-ceramic systems appear to be susceptible to thermal cycling, which can cause weaker bond strength. The objective of this study was to evaluate the bonding characteristics of titanium porcelain bonded to commercially pure titanium (Ti-Cp) or titanium–aluminum–vanadium (Ti–6Al–4V) alloy as well as the effect of thermal cycling on bond strength.

Methods. A three-point-flexure-test was used to evaluate the bond strength of titanium porcelain bonded to commercially pure titanium and Ti–6Al–4V alloy according to DIN 13.927. To evaluate the effect of thermal cycling on the samples, half were thermal cycled in temperatures ranging from 4 °C (±2 °C) to 55 °C (±2 °C). Results were compared with palladium-silver (Pd–Ag) alloy bonded to conventional porcelain (control). Scanning electron microscope (SEM) photomicrographs were taken to characterize the failed surfaces in the metal–ceramic interface. Anova and Tukey's multiple comparison tests were used to analyze the data at a 5% probability level.

Results. Thermal cycling did not significantly weaken the bond strength of porcelain to titanium interfaces. There was no significant difference in bond strength between commercially pure titanium (23.60 MPa for thermal cycled group and 24.99 MPa for non-thermal cycled group) and Ti–6Al–4V groups (24.98 and 25.60 MPa for thermal cycled and non-thermal cycled groups, respectively). Bond strength values for the control group (47.98 and 45.30 MPa, respectively) were significantly greater than those for commercially pure titanium and Ti–6Al–4V combinations.

Significance. The bond strength of low fusing porcelain bonded to cast pure titanium or Ti–6Al–4V alloy was significantly lower than the conventional combination of porcelain–Pd–Ag alloy. Thermal cycling did not affect the bond strength of any group.
