Objectives. The primary disadvantages of the materials which are used in construction of complete and removable partial dentures is that their esthetic, physical and mechanical properties change rapidly with time in the oral environment. For esthetics, color stability is one of the criteria that needs careful attention. Color may provide important information on the serviceability of these materials. Color change affects the gloss of these materials. The objective of the present study was to determine the gloss changes resulting from the testing process in four different beverages in one heat-polymerized denture base resin and one cold-polymerized denture base repair resin.

Methods. Thirty-six samples were fabricated for each material. Each sample had a smooth polished and a rough unpolished surface. The gloss measurements were made with a glossmeter before testing. Four different beverages (tea, coffee, cola and cherry juice) were used for testing. Two angles of illumination (20 and 60°) were used for the gloss measurements. The samples were immersed in water, tea, coffee, cola and cherry juice solutions. The gloss of the samples was measured again with the glossmeter at the end of the 45th day and 135th day of testing. The arithmetic mean and standard deviation of each of the samples were calculated and compared with each other statistically by using the Wilcoxon test (within times)(p≤0.05 significant), the Kruskal–Wallis analysis of variance (p≤0.05 significant) and the Mann–Whitney U-test with Bonforoni correction (when the difference between the samples was significant) (p≤0.05 significant).

Results. The results of this study revealed that gloss changes occurred after testing in heat-polymerized denture base resin and cold-polymerized denture base repair resin. The significance of the gloss changes exhibited by each sample, kept for different lengths of time in the same solution, were compared using the Wilcoxon test. The results were statistically significant (p≤0.05). According to the Kruskal–Wallis analysis of variance, the difference between measurements for angles of illumination was statistically significant (p≤0.05). Also according to the Mann–Whitney U-test, the difference between two polished surfaces or two unpolished surfaces was statistically insignificant (p>0.05), but the difference between smooth polished and rough unpolished surfaces was statistically significant (p≤0.05).

Significance. It was found that either the gloss of heat-polymerized denture base resin or the gloss of cold-polymerized denture base repair resin was affected by tested agents, and the four beverages demonstrated noticeable gloss changes. Cherry juice demonstrated the least change, while tea exhibited the greatest change.
