Objective. The aim of this study is to determine the in vitro two-body contact wear mechanisms of three medium filled composites and compare these with a highly filled composite previously investigated.

Materials and methods. Three commercial dental composites with filler mass fraction loading of 75–76% were evaluated. Two of the composites contained Ba–B–Al-silicate glass fillers and fumed silica with different particle sizes and distributions. One of these composites contained a fairly uniform distribution of filler particles ranging in size from 1 to 5 μm, whereas the particle size distribution in the second composite was bimodal consisting of small (less than 1 μm) and large (about 10 μm) particles. The third composite contained Ba–Al-silicate glass and silica with a filler particle size of approximately 1 μm. The composite disks were tested for wear against harder alumina counterfaces. Wear tests were conducted in distilled water using a pin-on-disk tribometer under conditions that represented typical oral conditions (sliding speed of 2.5 mm/s and contact loads ranging from 1 to 20 N). The wear tracks were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy to elucidate the wear mechanisms. The chemical composition of the water solution collected after the tests was determined using an inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) to detect possible chemical changes, e.g. dissolution of trace elements due to submersion or wear. The wear results were compared with those reported in an earlier study on a highly filled composite containing predominately alumino-silicate glass fillers and alumina at a filler loading of 92%.

Results. The differences in two-body wear rates between the three medium filled composites were not statistically significant (p<0.05) indicating that the variations in filler particle size and slight differences in chemical composition of the glass fillers do not affect the in vitro wear rates of these composites. Wear rates of these medium filled composites, however, were significantly lower than the highly filled composite (p<0.05). SEM, FTIR and ICP-MS analyses suggested that wear in the medium filled composites occurs by a complex set of processes involving tribochemical reactions between filler particles and water, formation of surface films containing a mixture of filler fragments and reaction products, and film delamination, as well as dissolution of the reaction products.

Significance. This study reveals that subtle changes in the filler particle size and small differences in filler composition do not significantly affect the two-body wear behavior of medium filled composites. However, the chemistry of filler particles plays an important role in altering the wear performance of composites when significant changes are made in the chemical composition of the fillers and when the filler loading is increased.
