Course testing has long been regarded by teachers as one of the best means to objectively evaluate whether students have achieved the instructional goal or objective set up by teachers. The purpose of course testing is to help teachers understand the degree to which students have mastered a course. Students´ test scores on a course may serve as a referential index whereby teachers can modify their instructional methods and provide remedial instruction where necessary, thus helping students achieve teachers´ instructional objective. Therefore, knowledge of students´ test scores not only helps teachers understand students´ learning syllabus, but also enables teachers to examine their instructional accountancy. Traditional education has formed the belief that students´ test scores are influenced by students´ sibling relations and the educational backgrounds, economic ability, and social status of other family members. Class formation (student grouping) and peer effect of course exert influences on students´ test scores to a large extent. These influencing factors, however, are not the major concern of the present study. Instead, the researcher regards the student test scores as a holistic factor. The analysis of the weighting of test courses, which is based on class students´ scores on each course, can help the course teacher improve his/her instructional method and increase the class average score on the course. The present study targets 29 5<sup>th</sup> grade students of an elementary school located in Changhua county. The survey is based on the mid-term exam of the spring semester of the academic year 101. The 29 students´ test scores on 5 courses including Chinese, English, mathematics, social and nature are the raw data for analysis. By applying significant in rough set, the researcher analyzes the test scores of each course. Analyzed data shows that English is the top-scoring course, while math is the course assuming the lowest average score. Chinese, - ocial and nature, which are positioned in between English and mathematics, are found to be almost on the same level. The analysis can serve as a guide whereby teachers may redesign their curriculum and enhance remedial instruction.
