The aim of this study was to examine the morphology of the hybrid layer (HL) of bonded water-stored specimens after different chemical pre-treatments of dentin.

Materials and methods. Twenty-seven recently extracted human molars were selected. Fifty-four dentin disks in middle/deep dentin were obtained with a slow speed saw with a diamond-impregnated disk under water lubrication. Smear layers were created with 180 grit silicon carbide under running water for 1 min. Different pre-treatments of dentin were: Group (1) no treatment; Group (2) 35% H3PO4 etch for 15 s followed by 10% glutaraldehyde for 120 s; Group (3) 37% H3PO4 etch for 15 s followed by 5% NaOCl for 120 s. Three dentin bonding agents (DBAs), Prime and Bond NT (P and B), AdmiraBond (AB), and Clearfil SE Bond (SEB) were applied in association with a resin composite following the manufacturers' directions. Each specimen was then longitudinally sectioned and polished with wet SiC papers (up to #4000 grit). Impressions of the polished dentin were immediately taken with a silicone impression material. Bonded specimens were then stored for 3 or 12 h in deionized water. Further impressions of stored specimens were taken after air-drying of specimens for 10 s. Positive replicas were obtained using a polyether impression material. All the replicas and the original specimens were inspected by SEM.

Results. A line of droplets (0.5–4 μm in diameter) was observed along the region of the adhesive–HL junction in all replicas of specimens stored in water, except in group 3, when P and B and AB were used. When SEB was used in each group the droplet were found in all groups except the zone of droplets was thinner. No differences in droplets dimensions were seen between 3 or 12 h water storage, or between the different dentin treatments.

Conclusions. The replica procedure used in this study was able to detect water trapped in the adhesive–HL region that was released during the setting of the impression material. The droplets observed in this region support the hypothesis that there can be bidirectional water movement within the adhesive–HL complex.
