Objectives: Methacrylated beta-cyclodextrins (MCDs) are novel candidate dental monomers if all or some of the hydroxyl groups of beta-cyclodextrin are substituted with methacrylate groups. The main objective of this study was to evaluate mechanical properties of a number of composite formulations having MCDs as novel dental comonomers. The properties determined were flexural strength (FS), volumetric shrinkage (VS), and degree of conversion (DC).

Methods: A mass fraction of 50% of MCD monomers was mixed with a mass fraction of 50% each of a series of dimethacrylate or monomethacrylate diluent comonomers to produce consistent formulations of a workable viscosity. For comparison a resin mixture of a mass fraction of 50% Bis-GMA and a mass fraction of 50% triethyleneglycol dimethacrylate (a typical dental resin mixture) was also studied. The mixtures were activated with camphorquinone and ethyl 4-dimethylamino benzoate. One part by mass of each activated resin formulation was mixed with three parts by mass of glass filler. Samples for the FS tests were prepared in (2×2×25) mm3 molds by light-curing the composites for 2 min on each side. The cured samples were immersed in 37 °C water for 24 h, and FS was measured with an Instron machine at a crosshead speed of 0.5 mm/min. VS was measured by a computer-controlled mercury dilatometer. DC was measured by near-infrared spectroscopy.

Results: The properties of the MCD-based composites depended on the kind of diluent used. With these MCD monomers, diluents of triethyleneglycol dimethacrylate, 1,10-decamethylenediol dimethacrylate, or benzyl methacrylate yielded the best composite properties.

Significance: Although not yet fully optimized, MCD-based composite formulations containing triethyleneglycol dimethacrylate, 1,10-decamethylenediol dimethacrylate, or benzyl methacrylate yielded flexural strength and volumetric shrinkage values were comparable to those of the Bis-GMA/triethyleneglycol dimethacrylate controls. These findings lend support for further development and evaluations of polymerizable cyclodextrin derivatives for use in dental materials.
