Objective
The purpose of this paper was to investigate the in vitro biodegradation of a guided tissue regeneration composite membrane, nano-carbonated hydroxyapatite/collagen/poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (nCHAC/PLGA). Especially for periodontal therapy, the functional graded material (FGM) nCHAC/PLGA membrane was prepared that consisted of three layers with 8 wt% nCHAC + PLGA/4 wt% nCHAC + PLGA/PLGA, where one face of the membrane is porous, thereby allowing cell growth thereon and the opposite face of the membrane smooth, thereby inhibiting cell adhesion.
Methods

For evaluation, in vitro degradation specimens of nCHAC/PLGA were immersed into artificial saliva solution at 37 °C for 1, 2, 4, 8 and 12 weeks to detect the weight loss over the period, and set pure PLGA membrane as control to compare the degraded behaviors. pH value and calcium concentration of the residual solution were measured, and morphology change was investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM).
Results

During the experimental period in vitro, the whole shape of the membrane could be kept for 4 weeks, after that it became powder at between 8 and 12 weeks. The results demonstrated that weight loss increased continuously with a reduction in mass of 23.1% after 4 weeks and 88% after 12 week for the nCHAC/PLGA three FGM layers composite membrane. The calcium concentration in the residual solution showed a significant increase after 4 weeks, which referred to the nano-carbonated hydroxyapatite degradation. Moreover, the pH value in the solution of the nCHAC/PLGA membrane was a little higher than that of the pure PLGA membrane, which demonstrated the possible neutralization effect from nCHAC composite for the acid outcome of PLGA in the solution. The pore structure of 8 wt% nCHAC + PLGA was enlarged on the porous surface, while the nonporous surface of pure PLGA also showed a small porous structure after increased time.
Significance

Degradation of the composite membrane is appropriate for practical periodontal repair. Moreover, the new mineral formation on the surface of the composite membrane referred to the possible positive effect in vivo for new bone tissue regeneration.
