Objective
Resection of locally recurrent rectal cancer (LRRC) after curative resection represents a difficult problem and a surgical challenge. The aim of this study was to evaluate the results of resecting the local recurrence of rectal cancer and to analyze factors that might predict curative resection and those that affect survival.
Patients and methods

A retrospective review was performed in 50 patients who underwent surgical exploration with intent to cure LRRC between April 1998 and April 2005. All of the patients had previously undergone resection of primary rectal adenocarcinoma. Of these patients' charts, operation and pathology reports were reviewed. Primary tumor and treatment details, hospital of initial treatment and TNM stage were registered. The following data were collected concerning the detection of the local recurrence; date of recurrence, symptoms at the time of presentation and diagnostic work-up. Perioperative complication and date of discharge were also gathered. The recurrent tumors were classified as not fixed (F0), fixed at one site (F1) and fixed to two or more sites (F2) according to the preoperative and peroperative findings. Microscopic involvement of surgical margins and localization of recurrence were noted based on pathology reports.
Results

The median time interval between resection of primary tumor and surgery for locally recurrent disease was 24 (4–113) months. In a statistical analysis, initial surgery, complaints of patients, increasing number of sites of the recurrent tumor fixation in the pelvis, location of the recurrent tumor were associated with curative surgery. Curative, negative resection margins were obtained in 24 (48%) of patients; in these patients a median survival of 28 months was achieved, compared to 12 months (p = 0.01) in patients with either microscopic or gross residual disease. Primary operation and CEA level at recurrence were also found to be important factors associated with improved survival. There was no operative mortality and, the complication rate was 24%.
Conclusions

This study demonstrated that many patients with LRRC can be resected with negative margins. The type of primary surgery, symptoms, location, and fixity of recurrent tumor are associated with the increased possibility of carrying out curative resection. Previous surgery and curative surgery are significant predictors of both disease-specific survival and overall survival.
