Objective
We have previously demonstrated that the frequency of transformation of the factor-dependent hematopoietic cell line FDCP-1JL26 was dramatically increased when cells were cocultured with the irradiated bone marrow cell line D2XRII. In many of our factor-independent subclonal cell lines that we examined, transformation to factor independence appeared to be due to the retrotransposition of intracisternal type A particles (IAP) into the growth factor genes that are normally required for survival and growth of FDCP-1JL26 cells. To determine the role of the irradiated microenvironment in the evolution of factor-independent cells, we have examined the expression and retrotransposition of IAPs after exposure to the irradiated bone marrow stromal cell line D2XRII.
Methods and Results
Differential display and Northern blot analysis demonstrated that IAPs were overexpressed in a nonautocrine factor-independent subclonal cell line, FI7CL2. The frequency of retrotransposition was determined by the introduction of the IAP-neoRT plasmid into FDCP-1JL26 cells. The IAP-neoRT contains a neomycin resistance gene (neo) that only becomes active after retrotransposition, and thus the frequency of retrotransposition in FDCP-1JL26 cells was quantified by determining the frequency of neo-resistant cells.
Conclusions
No significant increases in the expression of IAPs were observed after the cells were exposed to the irradiated stromal cells. This observation is in agreement with the observation that no increase in the frequency of retrotransposition could be detected. These results suggest that the irradiated bone marrow may have a passive role in the selection of factor-independent cells. During cocultivation, bone marrow stromal cells may provide a factor(s) to hematopoietic cells that allow it to survive in medium lacking IL-3. At random, a retrotransposition may occur that provides a selective advantage to the hematopoietic cells. In the absence of the irradiated stromal cells, the hematopoietic cells are perhaps more likely to die and therefore are not available for a random retrotransposition event to occur. This model is to be distinguished from an active role in which the irradiated microenvironment would synthesize or activate a factor(s) that promotes retrotransposition.

