Objective
In many patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), a residual population of primitive normal (Ph-negative) progenitors persists despite the marked expansion of the leukemic (Ph-positive) clone. These cells may be found in the blood of patients studied soon after diagnosis or during the period of endogenous hematopoietic recovery that follows myelo-reductive therapy. Based on those observations, we have developed a clinical protocol that allows collection of Ph-negative peripheral blood progenitor cells (PBPC) with transplantable hematopoietic regenerative potential. The aim of this study is to examine changes that occur in the percentage of Ph-negative- and Ph-positive-committed progenitor cells and to determine the relationship between changes and clinical outcome.
Materials and Methods
We followed 15 patients with CML, mobilized and autografted soon after diagnosis with 85%–100% Ph-negative PBPC for a median time of 28 months (range 18–50) after transplant. At 6 months, 1 year, 2 years, and last follow-up, cytogenetic analyses were performed on fresh bone marrow cells and on colony-forming cells (CFC).
Results
Autologous transplantation induces a reduction in the proportion of Ph-positive CFC, from 70%–100% to 0%–25% in the majority of patients (78%). After autografting, 8 of 15 patients achieved a long-lasting cytogenetic remission (median, 24 months; range, 21–43) with a Ph-positivity ranging between 0% and 20% at the level of mature mononuclear cells and colony-forming cells (CFC). In some patients, the majority of CFC remained Ph-negative, whereas the majority of the mature cells were Ph-positive. Other patients (5/15) developed cytogenetic relapse (100% Ph-positive), although they were in hematological remission. We found that detection of Ph-positive long-term- culture initiating cells (LTC-IC) in the marrow at diagnosis was the only factor significantly associated with recurrence of the disease (p < 0.01); on the other hand, the number of Ph-negative LTC-IC infused showed a significant correlation with a better outcome (p < 0.03).
Conclusion
We have shown that a prolonged period of complete or almost complete Ph-negative hemopoiesis can be achieved in patients with CML who undergo autografting with Ph-negative progenitors. Longer follow-up study will be needed to assess whether these changes are associated with improved survival
.
