Objective
The aim of this study was to evaluate which CD34+ cell subset contained in leukapheresis products could be regarded as the most predictive of long-term hematopoietic recovery after autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (auto-PBSCT).
Materials and Methods
Based on data from 34 patients with hematologic malignancies, doses of CD34+ cells and CD34+ cell subsets, defined by the expression of HLA-DR, CD38, CD117 (c-kit/R), CD123 (α subunit of IL-3/R), CD133 (AC133), and CD90 (Thy-1) antigens, were correlated with the number of short-term (i.e., colony-forming cells [CFC]) and long-term culture CFC (LTC-CFC) (generated at week 5 of culture) and with the kinetics of hematopoietic engraftment following auto-PBSCT. The capacity of autologous stroma (AS), normal human bone marrow stroma, and M2-10B4 murine cell line to sustain CD34+ cell growth was comparatively evaluated in the LTC assay.
Results
Our data demonstrated that some of the most primitive progenitor subsets (CD34+CD117−HLA-DR−, and CD34+CD38+HLA-DR−) showed the strongest correlation with LTC-CFC numbers generated within the AS, whereas no significant correlation was noted using normal bone marrow stroma. Multivariate analysis showed that the only CD34 cell subset independently associated with long-term (3 to 6 months) platelet engraftment after auto-bone marrow transplantation was the CD34+CD117−HLA-DR− phenotype; long-term erythrocyte engraftment was correlated with CD34+CD38+HLA-DR− cell content. The latter further influenced platelet engraftment in the first 3 months after auto-PBSCT. The most predictive parameters for neutrophil engraftment were CD34+CD38+HLA-DR− cell subtype and the total LTC-CFC quantity infused.
Conclusions
These data further support the hypothesis that the type of stromal feeders influences the frequency of LTC-CFC, possibly because they differ in their ability to interact with distinct subsets of hematopoietic stem cells. Furthermore, as the use of AS in LTC assay can mimic in vitro the human bone marrow microenvironment, it can be speculated that this culture system could be a useful means to study the kinetics of recovery of bone marrow stroma following chemotherapy and PBSCT. From these results, it can be concluded that some CD34+ cell subsets appear to be more reliable predictors of long-term hematopoietic recovery rates than total CD34+ cell quantity.

