Objective
The aim of this study was to evaluate the occurrence of T-cell spontaneous apoptosis (Aspont) and its modulation in vitro by the interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R) γ-chain (γc)-signaling cytokine IL-15 in patients transplanted with autologous peripheral blood progenitor cells (PBPC) for hematologic malignancies.
Materials and Methods
Patients were examined on days 30–60, 60–90, and 90–120 after PBPC infusion. Dissipation of mitochondrial transmembrane potential, a hallmark of T-cell apoptosis, has been detected using the fluorescent probe 3,3′-dihexyloxacarbocyanine iodide, after short-term T-cell culture in the absence or presence of exogenous cytokines. Expression of Bcl-2 family members has been studied by flow cytometry and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. T-cell proliferative responses to recall antigens have been estimated in autologous mixed leukocyte cultures.
Results
Aspont was seen in 45% ± 6% of CD4+ and 55% ± 6% of CD8+ T cells cultured in the absence of cytokines. Of interest, IL-15 and, to a lesser extent, its structural cousin IL-2 counteracted T-cell Aspont by inhibiting the processing of caspase-3 and up-regulating Bcl-2 mRNA and protein levels. Cell division tracking confirmed that IL-15 did not rescue T cells from Aspont by promoting proliferation but rather acted as a genuine survival factor. Addition of a γc-blocking antibody to cytokine-conditioned cultures abrogated both apoptosis inhibition and Bcl-2 induction by IL-15, suggesting involvement of the IL-2Rγc signal transduction pathway. Whereas cytokine-unprimed posttransplant T cells mounted inadequate responses to recall antigens, T cells conditioned with IL-15 expanded vigorously, indicating restoration of antigen-specific proliferation.
Conclusions
T cells recovering after autologous PBPC transplantation are highly susceptible to spontaneous apoptosis in vitro. This phenomenon can be counteracted by the γc-signaling cytokine IL-15. These findings suggest that IL-15 might be a promising immunomodulating agent to improve postgrafting T-cell function.

