Objective
Cord blood (CB) products are becoming routinely used in unrelated allogeneic transplantation for smaller pediatric patients. Because of the low numbers of cells in CB compared to bone marrow or peripheral blood progenitor cells, their use is more limited in larger adults. Therefore, we developed ex vivo expansion conditions for CB and currently are transplanting ex vivo expanded CB products to patients receiving high-dose chemotherapy. As there is concern that ex vivo expansion may exhaust long-term engrafting cells, the current clinical protocols consist of both an expanded fraction and an unexpanded fraction. To determine the effect of expansion culture on long-term engrafting cells, we evaluated the short- and long-term engrafting potential of ex vivo expanded CB using a fetal sheep xenogeneic transplant model.
Material and Methods

CD 34+ cells were selected from CB products and cultured in a two-step procedure in the presence of stem cell factor, megakaryocyte growth and differentiation factor, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor for 14 days. Starting cells (CD34+ cells), and cultured cells (day 7 and day 14 cells) were transplanted in 60-day-old fetal sheep and evaluated at various time points post transplant for the presence of human cells. Long-term engrafting cells were assessed by serial passage into secondary and tertiary recipients.
Results

Day 14 expanded CB cells provided more rapid engraftment than either the day 7 expanded cells or the day 0 cells; however, this engraftment was transient, and no human cells were detectable at 16 months post transplant in the animals that received the day 14 expanded cells. Day 0 cells had engrafted animals at 2 months post transplant and both the day 0 and day 7 cells persisted to 16 months or longer. In the secondary animals, the day 0 and day 7 cells engrafted equivalently at 3 months post transplant; however, no secondary engraftment resulted from the day 14 cells. The levels of engraftment in secondary animals receiving day 7 cells decreased with time to barely detectable levels at 12 months post transplant.
Conclusions

Ex vivo expansion of CB CD34+ cells under the conditions described results in the generation of increased mature cells and progenitors that are capable of more rapid engraftment in fetal sheep compared to unexpanded CB CD34+ cells. The expanded cells engrafted primary sheep but lacked secondary and tertiary engrafting potential. These studies demonstrate that although ex vivo expanded cells may be able to provide rapid short-term engraftment, the long-term potential of expanded grafts may be compromised. Therefore, clinical protocols may require transplantation of two fractions of cells, an expanded CB graft to provide rapid short-term engraftment and an unmanipulated fraction of CB graft to provide stem cells for long-term engraftment.
