Objective
Hematopoietic chimerism, a state where donor and recipient bone marrow cells coexist, is associated with donor-specific tolerance. Nonmyeloablative bone marrow transplantation (BMT) has been shown to induce stable mixed hematopoietic chimerism in dog leukocyte antigen (DLA)-matched dogs. The potential for inducing renal and skin allograft tolerance with nonmyeloablative BMT was investigated in DLA-identical and DLA-haploidentical dogs in this study.
Materials and Methods

Renal allografts were performed in 8 DLA-identical and 4 DLA-haploidentical dogs with nonmyeloablative conditioning (200 cGy TBI) and transient immunosuppression with cyclosporine (CSP) and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) with (n = 8) and without (n = 4) simultaneous BMT. Skin allografts were performed in 2 DLA-identical and 4 DLA-haploidentical dogs after stopping CSP and MMF. Two DLA-identical control dogs received renal allografts without TBI, BMT, or immunosuppression with CSP and MMF. Molecular chimerism was determined with a PCR-based DNA microsatellite assay. Serum creatinine (Cr) concentration, urine specific gravity, and sequential renal biopsies were monitored to assess renal allograft function.
Results

Donor-type blood cells were first detected 4 weeks posttransplantation in both the myeloid and lymphoid lineages. Donor chimerism was present for at least 76 weeks in the DLA-identical dogs. Mixed chimerism was not observed in the DLA-haploidentical dogs or DLA-identical dogs that did not undergo BMT. The renal allografts were acutely rejected within 14 days in the 2 DLA-identical control dogs. There was long-term (>5 yrs) renal allograft survival as evidenced by a normal (<2.0 mg/dL) serum Cr concentration in both the DLA-identical and DLA-haploidentical dogs that underwent 200 cGy TBI and transient immunosuppression with CSP and MMF either with or without simultaneous BMT. Renal allograft inflammation was severe in the control dogs, mild to moderate in the DLA-haploidentical dogs, and minimal in the DLA-identical dogs. Donor-specific skin grafts were accepted in the DLA-identical dogs but rejected in the DLA-haploidentical dogs. Nonmyeloablative conditioning (200 cGy TBI) and transient immunosuppression with CSP and MMF induce renal and skin allograft tolerance in DLA-identical and permit long-term renal allograft survival in DLA-haploidentical dogs. These findings suggest it may possible to obtain long-term allograft survival in DLA-identical and -haploidentical dogs without the need for chronic immunosuppressive therapy.
