Automated cell placement is a critical problem in very large scale integration (VLSI) physical design. New analytical placement methods that simultaneously spread cells and optimize wirelength have recently received much attention from both academia and industry. A novel and simple objective function for spreading cells over the placement area is described in the patent of Naylor et al. (U.S. Pat. 6301693). When combined with a wirelength objective function, this allows efficient simultaneous cell spreading and wirelength optimization using nonlinear optimization techniques. In this paper, we implement an analytic placer (APlace) according to these ideas (which have other precedents in the open literature), and conduct in-depth analysis of characteristics and extensibility of the placer. Our contributions are as follows. 1) We extend the objective functions described in (Naylor et al., U.S. Patent 6301693) with congestion information and implement a top-down hierarchical (multilevel) placer (APlace) based on them. For IBM-ISPD04 circuits, the half-perimeter wirelength of APlace outperforms that of FastPlace, Dragon, and Capo, respectively, by 7.8%, 6.5%, and 7.0% on average. For eight IBM-PLACE v2 circuits, after the placements are detail-routed using Cadence WRoute, the average improvement in final wirelength is 12.0%, 8.1%, and 14.1% over QPlace, Dragon, and Capo, respectively. 2) We extend the placer to address mixed-size placement and achieve an average of 4% wirelength reduction on ten ISPD\´02 mixed-size benchmarks compared to results of the leading-edge solver, FengShui. 3) We extend the placer to perform timing-driven placement. Compared with timing-driven industry tools, evaluated by commercial detailed routing and static timing analysis, we achieve an average of 8.4% reduction in cycle time and 7.5% reduction in wirelength for a set of six industry testcases. 4) We also extend the placer to perform input/output-core coplacement and constraint handing for mixed-signal designs. Our paper aims to, and empirically demonstrates, that the APlace framework is a general, and extensible platform for "spatial embedding" tasks across many aspects of system physical implementation.
