Objective
To explore the relationship of the Multiple Sclerosis Neuropsychology Questionnaire (MSNQ; [Benedict, R. H. B., Cox, D., Thompson, L. L., Foley, F., Weinstock-Guttman, B., & Munschauer, F. (2004). Reliable screening for neuropsychological impairment in multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis, 10, 675–678; Benedict, R. H. B., Munschauer, F., Linn, R., Miller, C., Murphy, E., Foley, F., et al. (2003). Screening for multiple sclerosis cognitive impairment using a self-administered 15-item questionnaire. Multiple Sclerosis, 9, 95–101]), a self-report screening measure of neuropsychological functioning in multiple sclerosis (MS), with everyday life functioning, neuropsychological functioning, and mood in MS. Additionally, to investigate the validity, sensitivity, and specificity of the MSNQ to predict cognitive impairment in persons with MS.
Study design
Cross-sectional, correlational analyses; analyses of sensitivity and specificity.
Setting
Neuropsychology lab-based study with adults from the community including persons with MS (n = 48) and healthy adults (n = 40).
Main outcome measures
Subjective and objective measures of everyday life functioning, neuropsychological functioning, and mood; ROC curve of MSNQ-Self report and MSNQ-Informant report, sensitivity and specificity of MSNQ-S and MSNQ-I.
Results
Correlational analyses indicate the MSNQ-S is significantly correlated with mood and self-reports of functioning, but not with objectively measures daily functioning and to only few neuropsychological tests. The MSNQ-I was not significantly correlated to mood, self-report of daily functioning or objectively measured daily functioning, but was significantly correlated with several measures of neuropsychological functioning.
Conclusion
The MSNQ-S was not supported as a sensitive screen for neuropsychological impairment in MS. However, the MSNQ-I was supported as a valid and sensitive screen of cognitive impairment in persons with MS, although further research is needed to determine an optimal cutoff score for this measure.

