The objective of this study was to investigate the clastogenic activity of plasma ultrafiltrates from HIV-I infected patients. Clastogenic factors are chromosome-damaging agents with low molecular weight (<10,000 daltons) which cause chromosome aberrations, sister chromatid exchanges, DNA strand breakage, and gene mutation. They have first been described in the plasma of irradiated persons, but they are also found in hereditary breakage syndromes and chronic inflammatory diseases with autoimmune reactions. Their formation and their clastogenic effects are modulated by superoxide anion radicals. We analyzed a total of 22 HIV-1 positive patients in comparison to 20 reference plasma samples from healthy HIV negative blood donors of similar age. The plasma ultrafiltrates (filter cutoff 10,000 daltons) from patients induced a statistically significant increase in chromosomal breakage in the cytogenetic test system (20.5 ± 6.8 aberrations per 100 cells), while no increase was observed in test cultures exposed to plasma ultrafiltrates from healthy blood donors (6.3 ± 2.9 aberrations per 100 cells). The breakage values were slightly, but not significantly, lower in the 10 patients with more than 200 T-helper cells/ml (18 ± 4 aberrations per 100 cells), than in the 12 patients with less than 200 T-helper cells/ml (22.3 ± 7.9 aberrations per 100 cells). HIV patients with high clastogenic activity (induction of more than 20 aberrations per 100 cells, range 20 to 39) showed higher plasma levels for malondialdehyde than those with lower clastogenic activity (less than 20 aberrations per 100 cells, range 12 to 18). However, the difference was statistically not significant. Another lipid peroxidation product, 4-hydroxynonenal, was increased equally in both groups. There were no significant differences in water- and lipid-soluble plasma antioxidants between the low- and high-breakage group. In agreement with previous findings, the clastogenic effects of plasma ultrafiltrates in the test cultures were reduced by the antioxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase. The presence of clastogenic factors in the plasma of HIV patients is further evidence for a prooxidant state in these persons. Since clastogenic factor formation appears to occur at an early stage of the disease, it may be significant for virus release or activation, because of the superoxide anion stimulating effects of clastogenic factors. From a practical standpoint, clastogenic factors may be useful for evaluation of promising drugs.
