Zinc has been shown to have antioxidant actions, which may be due, in part, to induction of metallothionein (MT). Such induction can protect tissues against various forms of oxidative injury because MT can function as an antioxidant. The objective of this study was to investigate if zinc or MT induction by zinc could afford protection against CYP2E1-dependent toxicity. HepG2 cells overexpressing CYP2E1 (E47cells) were treated with 60 μM arachidonic acid (AA), which is known to be toxic to these cells by a mechanism dependent on CYP2E1, oxidative stress, and lipid peroxidation. E47 cells were preincubated overnight in the absence or presence of metals such as zinc or cadmium that can induce MT. The culture medium containing the metals was removed, AA was added, and cell viability determined after 24 h incubation. Preincubation overnight with 150 μM zinc sulfate or 5 μM cadmium chloride induced a 20- to 30-fold increase of MT2A mRNA; high levels of MT2A mRNA were maintained during the subsequent challenge period with AA, even after the zinc was removed. MT protein levels were increased about 4- to 5-fold during the overnight preincubation with zinc and a 20- to 30-fold increase was observed 24 h after zinc removal during the AA challenge. The treatment with zinc was associated with significant protection against the loss of cell viability caused by AA in E47 cells. The zinc pretreatment protected about 50% against the DNA fragmentation, cell necrosis, the enhanced lipid peroxidation and increased generation of reactive oxygen species, and the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential induced by AA treatment in E47 cells. CYP2E1 catalytic activity and components of the cell antioxidant defense system such as glutathione (GSH), glutathione-S-transferase (GST), glutathione peroxidase (GPX), catalase, Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD), and MnSOD were not altered under these conditions. Zinc preincubation also protected the E47 cells against BSO-dependent toxicity. When E47 cells were coincubated with zinc plus AA for 24 h (i.e., zinc was not removed, nor was there a preincubation period prior to challenge with AA), AA toxicity was increased. Thus, zinc had a direct pro-oxidant effect in this model and an indirect antioxidant effect, perhaps via induction of MT. MT may have potential clinical utility for the prevention or improvement of liver injury produced by agents known to be metabolized by CYP2E1 to reactive intermediates and to cause oxidative stress.
