Objective: To detect and measure correlation between cortical and muscle activities, coherence analysis was used.
Methods: The electroencephalogram (EEG) and electromyogram (EMG) were recorded in 9 normal volunteers during tonic contraction of upper and lower limb muscles on the right side. Coherence between EEG and EMG was computed to analyze their linear association.
Results: EEG over the contralateral sensorimotor area was coherent with EMG, with peak coherence at 11–36 Hz (mean, 22 Hz). For the abductor pollicis brevis (APB) muscle, peak coherence, as determined by functional brain mapping with focal transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), was over or slightly posterior to the hand area on the primary motor cortex determined by focal transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). Peak coherence over the scalp was somatotopically organized. The temporal relation between EEG and EMG was analyzed with a new model for interpreting the phase shift (‘constant phase shift plus constant time lag’ model). For the APB muscle, the phase relation between cortical and muscular oscillations differed in the frequency ranges of 3–13 Hz and 14–50 Hz, respectively, suggesting that different coupling mechanisms operate in different bands. Only the phase shift between cortical and motoneuronal firing at 14–50 Hz was reliably estimated by a linear model. At 14–50 Hz, motoneuronal firing was led by surface-negative cortical activity with a constant time lag that depended on the cortical-muscular distance. For the APB muscle, the time lag was slightly shorter than the cortical-muscular conduction time determined by TMS. Vibratory stimulation (100 Hz) of a muscle tendon during tonic contraction had no significant effect on cortical-muscular coherence, indicating that cortical oscillation reflected motor rather than sensory activity.
Conclusions: The present findings suggest temporal coding of the oscillatory motor control system (3–13 Hz vs. 14–50 Hz), and confirm the functional importance of cortical beta and gamma rhythms in the motor efferent command. Cortical-muscular synchronization is most likely mediated by the direct corticospinal pathway within the frequency range of 14–50 Hz.

