Objective: We sought to describe if neurological damage, in terms of brain lesions, syndrome and syndrome severity led to abnormalities in the brain-stem auditory evoked potentials (BAEPs) in order to provide a profile of children that could be used as an indicator of subsequent neurological sequelae. We analyzed the BAEPs from a group of children having prior evidence of neurological damage and determined the presence of neurological sequelae when the subjects were 3 years old.
Methods: Brain-stem auditory evoked potentials (BAEPs) were carried out in a group of 154 children with perinatal neurological damage. The children were classified with neurofunctional (clinical and EEG alterations) or organic and neurofunctional brain disease (clinical, EEG and image alteration) and were all followed from the first month of life and serially for 3 years. We used principal component analysis (PCA), clustered analysis and linear correlation to determine association between BAEPs, risk factors and future sequelae.
Results: Latencies of BAEPs decreased significantly with age, and the time of conduction was modified by the presence of neurological damage. All statistical analyses suggested positive and significant associations between risk factors (trophism and condition at birth), and the latencies of waves I, III and V as well as with IPL III窶天 (interpeak latency) and I窶天. PCA showed that IPL I窶的II was also positively associated with condition at birth, severity of the neurological syndrome and encephalopathy. In addition, we found that the presence and type of sequela reflected changes in the latencies of the waves, as well as IPLs, primarily those of IPL I窶的II.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that statistical methods are often needed to analyze neurological damage. The relation between BAEPs, risk factors and neurological sequelae allowed us to obtain a profile of children, which can be then used as an aid in the prognosis of children having a risk of developing neurological sequelae.

