Objective: Simple reaction time (RT) can be influenced by transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to the motor cortex. Since TMS differentially affects RT of ipsilateral and contralateral muscles a combined RT and TMS investigation sheds light on cortical motor control of bimanual movements.
Methods: Ten normal subjects and one subject with congenital mirror movements (MM) were investigated with a RT paradigm in which they had to move one or both hands in response to a visual go-signal. Suprathreshold TMS was applied to the motor cortex ipsilateral or contralateral to the moving hand at various interstimulus intervals (ISIs) after presentation of the go-signal. EMG recordings from the thenar muscles of both hands were used to determine the RT.
Results: TMS applied to the ipsilateral motor cortex shortened RT when TMS was delivered simultaneously with the go-signal. With increasing ISI between TMS and go-signal the RT was progressively delayed. This delay was more pronounced if TMS was applied contralateral to the moving hand. When normal subjects performed bimanual movements the TMS-induced changes in RT were essentially the same as if they had used the hand in an unimanual task. In the subject with MM, TMS given at the time of the go-signal facilitated both the voluntary and the MM. With increasing ISI, however, RT for voluntary movements and MM increased in parallel.
Conclusions: Ipsilateral TMS affects the timing of hand movements to the same extent regardless of whether the hand is engaged in an unimanual or a bimanual movement. It can be concluded, therefore, that in normal subjects simple bimanual movements are controlled by each motor cortex independently. The results obtained in the subject with MM are consistent with the hypothesis that mirror movements originate from uncrossed corticospinal fibres. The alternative hypothesis that a deficit in transcallosal inhibition leads to MM in the contralateral motor cortex is not compatible with the presented data, because TMS applied to the motor cortex ipsilateral to a voluntary moved hand affected voluntary movements and MM to the same extent.

