Objective: To evaluate the effects of mechanical compression of the brain-stem in patients with vertebrobasilar dolichoectasia (VBD).
Methods: In the framework of a prospective, observational study that collected clinical and laboratory data in patients with VBD, we studied 20 patients with compression of the brain-stem due to ectatic, tortuous basilar or vertebral arteries. Patients with cerebral lesions other than small lacunae in the white matter of the cerebral hemispheres were excluded from the study. Patients underwent vestibular and auditory function testing, including brain-stem auditory evoked potentials (BAEPs), blink reflex (BR), somatosensory evoked potentials (SEPs), and motor evoked potentials (MEPs).
Results: Almost all of the patients complained of auditory or vestibular symptoms and none had symptoms or signs of impairment of long tracts or the facial and trigeminal nerves. The most consistent findings were BR abnormalities with prolongation of ipsilateral R1 latency in cases of compression of the pons (10/16) and prolongation of the R2 and R2c latencies with compression of the medulla oblongata (5/15). Subclinical impairment of corticospinal pathways was found in 13 out of 25 instances of compression, and this was more frequent with compression of the pons. Abnormal BAEPs or SEPs were less frequently encountered, and only in cases with compression of the pons.
Conclusions: Neurovascular compression of the brain-stem, even with severe distortion, is seldom associated with overt clinical signs, whereas subclinical dysfunctions are relatively frequent. The central pathways of the BR and the corticospinal pathways are more susceptible to compression than acoustic and sensory pathways. BR, MEP and BAEP data provide a functional evaluation of the brain-stem and some cranial nerves, which is lacking in imaging studies. Functional investigations may be useful in the long-term management of these patients, since VBD may be progressive and surgical correction may be required at some stage.

