Objective: We aimed to determine whether or not the potential distribution of the sympathetic skin response (SSR) on the palm and dorsum of the hand can be described by an equivalent current dipole (ECD) as an SSR source model.
Methods: The SSR of 22 normal subjects were simultaneously obtained from two electrodes placed on the palm and the dorsum of hand, with an indifferent electrode on the thumbnail. We then measured the SSR potential distribution in 10 of the 20 subjects who had responded to stimulation with a clear dorsal SSR. To do this, 18 electrodes were attached to the palm and dorsum of the hand. SSR-evoking stimulation (sound, voice and rapid inspiration) were randomly delivered to the subject at time intervals of more than 1 min to minimize the habituation effect. We estimated the ECD from the measured potential distribution.
Results and conclusions: The SSR-evoked by stimulation was negative in potential at the palmar sites of all 22 subjects, and was positive in potential at the dorsal sites of the hand in 20 of the 22 subjects. The SSR potential distribution, which was measured in 10 subjects, reached its maximum negative and positive potential near the base of the middle finger on the palm, and near the corresponding site on the dorsum of the hand, respectively. The SSR potential measured on the dorsum of the hand, however, was about 1/3 in amplitude of those on the palmar sites. These results suggest that the SSR source is located on the palm (probably the sweat glands) as confirmed by the estimated ECD (a negative pole on the palm and a positive pole on the dorsum of the hand). We speculate that the SSR may result from the potential difference caused by the Na+ concentration gradient in the sweat, which results from intracanal reabsorption of Na+.
Significance: The ECD resulting from the Na+ concentration gradient within the canal of sweat glands is thought to be the source of the SSR from the negative pole on the palm to the positive pole on the dorsum.

