Objective: The objective of the present study was to compare the effects of high stimulus rate and click position in the train on monaurally and binaurally evoked activities in the human auditory brainstem and suggest their possible physiological mechanism.
Methods: Auditory brainstem evoked potentials (ABEPs) were recorded from 15 normally and symmetrically hearing adults from 3 channels, in response to 50 dB nHL, alternating polarity clicks, presented at a rate of 21/s as well as separately to each click in a train of 10 with an interstimulus interval of 11 ms. Click trains were presented at a rate of 5.13/s. The binaural interaction components (BICs) of ABEPs were derived by subtracting the response to binaural clicks from the algebraic sum of monaural responses. Single, centrally located equivalent dipoles were estimated as concise measures of the surface-summated activity of ABEPs and BICs generators.
Results: A significant effect of click position in the train on equivalent dipole latency of ABEP component V and on equivalent dipole magnitude of III were found. Latency was prolonged and amplitude was increased the later the click's position in the train. A significant effect of click position in the train on equivalent dipole latencies of all components of BICs was found. Latencies were prolonged if the click's position occurred later in the train, with most of the latency shift achieved by the third click in the train for the first major BIC and by the seventh click for other BIC components. No significant effects on equivalent dipole magnitudes of BICs were found. No significant effect of click position in the train on orientation of any of the equivalent dipoles of ABEP or BIC was found.
Conclusions: The progressive prolongation of latency of ABEP and BIC components with advancing position in the train may be attributed to cumulatively decreased synaptic efficacy at high stimulus rates, resulting in prolonged synaptic delays along the auditory pathway. The paradoxic enhancement of ABEP dipole III magnitude with advancing click position in the train may reflect higher sensitivity of inhibitory brainstem neurons to increased stimulus rate, resulting in disinhibition. The absence of significant effects on BIC dipole magnitudes may reflect the amplifying effect of divergence in the ascending auditory pathway, as has been observed for the monaurally evoked ABEP components from the upper pons.

