Objective: One of the primary goals of preoperative evaluation of patients considered to be candidates for epilepsy surgery is the delineation of eloquent cortex adjacent to the area of resection. The aim of this study is the functional localization of the sensorimotor cortex in relation to an epileptogenic frontal lobe lesion, thus enabling a more complete resection in these patients while minimizing the risk of postoperative neurological deficits.
Methods: Participating in this study were patients with epilepsy, diagnosed as being related to a left or right frontal lobe lesion. Magnetoencephalographic responses evoked by electrical stimulation of the left and right hand median nerve were localized using single time-point equivalent dipole (ED) modeling, taking into account the realistic shape of the head. Instead of relying on the primary component (N/P 20) of the somatosensory evoked magnetic fields (SEFs) in this study ED fits were obtained for each time-point of the somatosensory evoked responses. On a cortical rendering, the reconstructed dipoles were depicted relative to the anatomy obtained from 3D-magnetic resonance imaging.
Results: The results of single time-point ED analysis including all the components of the responses indicated that the sources underlying the SEFs are located at the borders of the central sulcus (CS). The opposite direction of the sources underlying, respectively, the primary and subsequent late component of the SEFs indicated distinct sources located at the opposite banks of the CS. These sources, therefore, might correspond to the sensory hand projection area and the primary motor area of the sensorimotor cortex. It appeared that the location of the EDs obtained for the SEFs of 4 of the 7 patients studied were asymmetric for the left and right hemisphere, probably because of a displacement of the sensorimotor areas relative to the CS. The systematic assessment of the dipole fits compared to brain anatomy confirmed that volume conduction changes due to the lesion were not responsible for these observed deviations, thus leaving as explanation space-occupying and neurophysiological changes due to the lesion.

