Objective: The somatosensory evoked potentials of the median nerve (SEP) were registered intracerebrally in 12 subjects to elucidate the origin of N30 component and its behavior in the motor ‘gating’ tasks.
Methods: The recordings were done from the electrodes which were inserted within the cortex of frontal lobe in the pre-surgical phase of epilepsy surgery. The registrations focused on the precentral N30 SEP component and its behaviour under the ‘gating’ paradigms. Two different ‘gating’ paradigms, motor and mental, were used and the SEP then were recorded in 3 conditions: (1) normal (N) paradigm, during which the subjects were instructed not to perform any movement by the stimulated hand, or to mentally simulate the movement; (2) active movement (AM) paradigm, during which the subjects were instructed to perform the active movement as the internal motor sequence test by the fingers of the hand of the stimulated limb; (3) mental movement simulation (MMS), during which the subjects were instructed to only mentally simulate the movements performed in the previous paradigm, and this ‘virtual’ movement also involved the hand of the stimulated limb. The recordings were done at least twice in each paradigm and averaged runs of 2000 artefact-free sweeps were used for the analysis.
Results: The results demonstrated that the precentral N30 component of SEP is generated only in the pre-motor area, either dorsolaterally or mesially, which consists of Brodmann's areas 6 and 8, and their borders. Only the N30 potentials recorded there in 7 subjects had a shape and character of ‘near-field’ potential. The behaviour of the N30 component when recorded in the AM and MMS paradigms was different depending on the fact of whether they were recorded dorsolaterally or mesially. When there was a clear ‘near-field’ N30 potential recorded mesially, there was a certain gating present during the AM paradigm, i.e. during the performance of movement. However, the gating caused by the mental movement simulation in the MMS paradigm was substantially more expressed, and the N30 wave practically disappeared in some cases. On the contrary, the gating of the N30 wave, recorded in the frontal dorsolateral premotor cortex (DLPC), was almost complete when the AM (active movement) paradigm was employed, and it was only partial when the MMS paradigm (mental movement simulation) was employed.
Conclusions: The results of N30 registrations in our group of patients strongly support the theory of separate generator (or generators) of the N30 wave within the premotor cortex. They also brought forward evidence that the dorsolateral premotor cortex (Brodmann's areas 6 and 8) serves as the substrate of the ‘motor execution’ process, and the mesial frontal cortex (Brodmann's area 6) serves as the substrate of the ‘motor planning’ process. Further research should focus on the mutual registration of neurophysiological phenomena and imaging phenomena to obtain new data, which will be able to more precisely elucidate the workings of the premotor cortex during the whole process of motor performance.

