Objective
Multi-channel electromyogram (EMG) was used to examine the pattern and time-course of voluntary contraction recovery in subjects with acute traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI), concentrating on the latest time after injury at which a given muscle would begin to show voluntary recruitment.
Methods
We conducted repeated measures of voluntary contractions of 12 lower limb muscles (for all subjects) and 12 upper-limb muscles (for subjects with cervical injury), beginning within days of the injury and extending for 1 or more years post-injury. The EMG interference pattern was scored in a blinded fashion from tape records.
Results
We recruited 229 subjects, including 152 from whom repeated measures were made. Several different patterns of recovery were identified. For persons with motor-incomplete injury to the cervical or thoracic spine, EMG recruitment had not yet occurred by 5 weeks post-injury in roughly 1/2 of all lower limb muscles, and prolonged delays between injury and recruitment onset were sometimes seen. Injury to the thoracolumbar spine was frequently associated with very long delays (i.e. >1 year) between injury and resumption of volitional contraction of distal lower limb muscles.
Discussion
The incidence of neurologically incomplete SCI is rising. In such subjects, delays of 1 or more months between injury and the onset of voluntary contraction are common for muscles of the distal upper limbs (for cervical injury) and lower limbs. Given the abbreviated period of in-patient rehabilitation now routine in the United States, these subjects in particular will benefit from frequent follow-up evaluations to assess spontaneous recovery and design appropriate rehabilitation strategies to maximize functional independence. Moreover, the potential for delayed recovery must be considered when designing and implementing novel clinical interventions for treating SCI, to better differentiate between spontaneous and treatment-related improvements in neurologic function.

