Objective
This study was aimed at the development of a seizure detection system by training neural networks using quantitative motion information extracted by motion segmentation methods from short video recordings of infants monitored for seizures.
Methods
The motion of the infants' body parts was quantified by temporal motion strength signals extracted from video recordings by motion segmentation methods based on optical flow computation. The area of each frame occupied by the infants' moving body parts was segmented by direct thresholding, by clustering of the pixel velocities, and by clustering the motion parameters obtained by fitting an affine model to the pixel velocities. The computational tools and procedures developed for automated seizure detection were tested and evaluated on 240 short video segments selected and labeled by physicians from a set of video recordings of 54 patients exhibiting myoclonic seizures (80 segments), focal clonic seizures (80 segments), and random infant movements (80 segments).
Results
The experimental study described in this paper provided the basis for selecting the most effective strategy for training neural networks to detect neonatal seizures as well as the decision scheme used for interpreting the responses of the trained neural networks. Depending on the decision scheme used for interpreting the responses of the trained neural networks, the best neural networks exhibited sensitivity above 90% or specificity above 90%.
Conclusions
The best among the motion segmentation methods developed in this study produced quantitative features that constitute a reliable basis for detecting myoclonic and focal clonic neonatal seizures. The performance targets of this phase of the project may be achieved by combining the quantitative features described in this paper with those obtained by analyzing motion trajectory signals produced by motion tracking methods.
Significance
A video system based upon automated analysis potentially offers a number of advantages. Infants who are at risk for seizures could be monitored continuously using relatively inexpensive and non-invasive video techniques that supplement direct observation by nursery personnel. This would represent a major advance in seizure surveillance and offers the possibility for earlier identification of potential neurological problems and subsequent intervention.

