Objective
The diagnosis of bipolar disease frequently requires a long time since the age of onset, especially because the disease is misdiagnosed with schizophrenia. The aim of the present work was to investigate whether sera from bipolar patients have an active substance that allows making a fast identification of the disease.
Methods
Sera from healthy volunteers, euthymic and non-stabilized bipolar patients, and schizophrenic patients were passively transferred into CF1 mice and after 2 day injections, MEPP frequency from diaphragm muscles was recorded. The same procedure was performed with sera fraction of high and low MW (cut-off 3000).
Results
Sera from non-stabilized bipolar patients induced a decreased MEPP frequency and occluded the presynaptic inhibitory effect of the specific adenosine A1 receptor agonist 2-chloro-N6-cyclopentyl-adenosine (CCPA) in the recipient mice, while in the euthymic bipolar group spontaneous secretion reached control values although the action of CCPA was still prevented. Similar results were obtained with low MW sera fraction from euthymic and non-stabilized bipolar patients. The addition of adenosine deaminase to the sera fraction prevented the modification of spontaneous ACh release. In mice injected with sera from schizophrenic patients, MEPP frequency was within control values and CCPA induced its typical inhibitory action.
Conclusions
These results indicate that bipolar patients contain in their blood an active substance compatible with adenosine, which was able to modify spontaneous ACh release in the recipient mice. This effect was not observed with sera from healthy volunteers and schizophrenic patients. The increase of adenosine concentration may result from synaptic hyperactivity that presumably plays a role in the symptoms of bipolar disorder and/or may derive from peripheral cells through a more general mechanism.
Significance
The different results obtained with bipolar and schizophrenic sera raise the possibility that the passive transfer model could be used as a diagnostic test in the future.

