Objective
High Frequency repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (HF-rTMS) has yielded divergent results concerning its effect on mood in normal volunteers. In a former study, we were unable to demonstrate negative mood effects after one session of HF-rTMS on the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) in a large group of healthy female volunteers: researchers had focused mainly on negative mood changes, overlooking a possible positive mood induction, while no studies had yet examined mood effects of HF-rTMS delivered on the right prefrontal cortex. In this study, we have tried to replicate our previous HF-rTMS findings on the left DLPFC in a new (large) group of healthy female subjects, and we focused especially on positive mood changes. We also extended our former research by stimulating the right DLPFC in a different but comparable (large) group of healthy female volunteers with the same HF-rTMS parameters.
Methods
In this sham-controlled, single blind, crossover HF-rTMS study, stimulus parameters were an exact copy of our previous healthy volunteer study. To exclude individual anatomical differences, the left and right DLPFC were targeted under magnetic resonance (MRI) guidance. To examine subjective mood changes we used Visual Analogue Scales (VAS), the Profile of Mood States (POMS), and the Positive Affect and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS), the latter to assure assessment of positive emotions. To detect any delayed mood changes, assessments were also re-administered 30 min post-HF-rTMS.
Results
We were unable to demonstrate immediate or delayed mood changes after one single active HF-rTMS session on the left or right DLPFC.
Conclusions
Although we took into account several methodological problems which might have confounded previous rTMS mood induction studies, the hypothesis that one single session of HF-rTMS on the left or on the right DLPFC can influence mood in healthy female volunteers was not supported.
Significance
One HF-rTMS session has no effect on subjective mood in healthy female volunteers.

