The objective of this study was to assess the structural, mechanical and electrophysiological changes associated with chronic administration of epirubicin (Pharmorubicin), which is a cardiotoxic anthracycline antibiotic used in conventional cancer chemotherapy. New Zealand white rabbits (8 weeks) were treated with twice-weekly infusions of epirubicin (2 mg/kg) or saline for a period of 6 weeks, followed by a wash-out period of 2 weeks. Myocardial damage consistent with cardiomyopathy was observed in the epirubicin-treated animals; electron micrographs indicated myofibril loss together with separation of the intercalated disc and dilation of the sarcotubular system. Contractile function, as measured by mechanical shortening, action potentials and -type Ca2+currents were examined in ventricular cardiomyocytes, which were isolated by means of enzymatic dissociation using collagenase. There was an attenuation in the contractile response to isoprenaline in cardiomyocytes isolated from the hearts of epirubicin-treated rabbits compared to control rabbits. Cardiomyocytes isolated from epirubicin-treated rabbits had greater basal contractile amplitude (11.0±0.3 %dL,n=8) than control myocytes (8.2±0.3 %dL,n=9), but had similar maximum responses of 19.1±0.6 %dL, and 17.3±0.5 %dL, respectively, when stimulated with 1μ isoprenaline. No differences were noted in the peak -type Ca2+current of myocytes isolated from the hearts of control and epirubicin-treated rabbits; however, in the latter, there was a prolongation of the action potential duration (396±25 ms) compared to that in controls (321±26 ms). These results demonstrate structural and mechanical alterations in ventricular cardiomyocytes which are compatable with a mild cardiomyopathy following chronic treatment with the anthracycline, epirubicin. The increase in basal contraction is likely to be due to more efficient coupling of electrical stimulation, and the depressed inotropic responsiveness following stimulation with isoprenaline indicates that there may be changes in cell membrane properties. Compared to control cardiomyocytes, cells isolated from the hearts of epirubicin-treated rabbits were more heterogeneous, with respect to cell dimensions, and had significantly different electromechanical properties.
