A hybrid electric vehicle (HEV) is a combination of two power sources: one unidirectional power source based on an internal combustion engine (ICE) (gasoline or diesel fueled), and the other bidirectional based on batteries or electric energy storage subsystem, plus electric machines (EMs). No matter how these two power sources are combined, a hybrid vehicle has the same basic energy flow. From this point of view, just one model for different architectures is possible. Thereby, simulation by only the same and unique program for different vehicles can be done, thus making the comparison of different vehicles easier. To establish this global modeling, a causal modeling approach is required. It should focus on the system function and not only on the structure of system. At the same time, this method should have a global energetic view. This is why energetic macroscopic representation (EMR) is used to establish this global modeling. EMR is a graphical modeling tool (see "Synoptic of EMR") to describe electromechanical systems using causal modeling or functional modeling. Therefore, only one simulation program is suitable for ICE vehicles, battery-powered electric vehicles (BEVs), series hybrid vehicles, parallel hybrid vehicles and series-parallel hybrid vehicles. This way it is easy to compare different vehicles and their different controls.Since vehicles equipped with ICEs have been in existence for over 100 years, ICE technology can be considered quite mature. This kind of transportation creates air pollution and exacerbates the green house effect; both serious issues that we have to face. With the pressure of a future oil shortage, more stringent standards for the fuel consumption and emissions have been developed. BEVs seem to be an ideal solution to tackle the energy crisis and global warming. However, BEVs\´ limitations include a short driving range and long charging time. Thus, HEVs were developed to overcome the disadvantages of both ICE vehicles and pure BEVs.- Using different approaches, modeling for different vehicle architectures have been discussed. Generally, considering the different combinations of devices, each architecture has its own modeling. In, a series-parallel hybrid using a planetary gear has been modeled by EMR. Afterward, this modeling is used to describe series hybrid vehicles, parallel hybrid vehicles, and series-parallel hybrid vehicles. In this article, that global modeling is extended through torque couplings to be suitable for ICE vehicles, BEVs, series hybrid vehicles, parallel hybrid vehicles, and series-parallel hybrid vehicles.
