The science of systems requires a specific and constructive mathematical model and language which would describe jointly such systemic categories as adaptation, self-organization, complexity, and bring the applied tools for building a system model for each specific object of a diverse nature. This formalism should be connected directly with a world of information and computer applications of a systemic model, developed for a particular object. The aim of the considered information systems theory (IST) is to build a bridge between the mathematical systemic formalism and information technologies. The objective is to develop a constructive systemic model of revealing information regularities and specific information code for each object. To fulfill the goal and the considered systems´ definition, the IST joins two main concepts. First is the unified information description of the different nature´s interacted flows, with a common information language and systems modeling methodology, applied to distinct interdisciplinary objects. Second is the general system´s information formalism for building the model, which allows expressing mathematically the system´s regularities and main systemic mechanisms. This formalism is represented by informational macrodynamics (IMDs), which reveals the system model´s main layers: microlevel stochastics, macrolevel dynamics, hierarchical dynamic network (IN) of information structures, its minimal logic, and optimal code of communication language, generated by the IN hierarchy, dynamics, and geometry. The system´s complex dynamics originate information geometry and evolution with the functional information mechanisms of ordering, cooperation, mutation, stability, diversity, adaptation, self-organization, and the double helix´s genetic code. The developed IMD´s theoretical computer-based methodology and software has been applied to such areas as technology, communications, computer science, intelligent processes, biology, economy, m- anagement, and other nonphysical and physical subjects. The review is written for a broad reader´s audience familiar with basic physics, calculus, and computers.
