Objective The primary objective of this randomized, double-blind, parallel group trial was to compare the antianginal and antiischemic efficacy of a combination tablet of felodipine-metoprolol 10/100 mg once daily with both drugs given separately once daily in patients with stable effort-induced angina pectoris. The secondary objective was to compare the tolerability of the 3 treatments. Methods The main criteria for inclusion were stable effort-induced angina pectoris for at least 2 months before the enrollment and a positive bicycle exercise test result. Patients were allocated to once-daily treatment with either felodipine-metoprolol 10/100 mg, felodipine 10 mg, or metoprolol 100 mg. The duration of active double-blind treatment was 4 weeks. There were 3 primary efficacy variables in the study; time until end of exercise, time until onset of chest discomfort, and time until 1-mm ST depression during a standardized exercise test. Results  The number of patients randomized was 397. There was a statistically significant improvement in time until end of exercise with felodipine-metoprolol 10/100 mg compared with metoprolol 100 mg (P = .04) and felodipine 10 mg compared with metoprolol 100 mg ( P  = .03). However, for time until onset of pain or time until 1-mm ST-depression there were no significant differences among the treatment groups. At highest comparable workload, ST depression was less pronounced with felodipine-metoprolol than with metoprolol alone (P  = .04), and the rate-pressure product was significantly lower in the groups receiving felodipine-metoprolol and metoprolol than in the group receiving felodipine alone. The combination and metoprolol were better tolerated than felodipine alone. Conclusions  In stable angina pectoris, the combination felodipine-metoprolol 10/100 mg and felodipine 10 mg alone increased exercise time compared with metoprolol 100 mg. The combination tablet and metoprolol 100 mg alone showed a more favorable tolerability profile than felodipine 10 mg alone. (Am Heart J 1999;137:854-62.)
