Objective This study was performed to determine if factors other than the size of regional dysfunction influence the global left ventricular ejection fraction after acute myocardial infarction. Background  Left ventricular ejection fraction is an important prognostic variable after acute myocardial infarction. Although infarct size is known to affect the subsequent global left ventricular ejection fraction, it remains unclear whether other factors such as site or severity of the wall motion abnormality influence the ejection fraction after acute myocardial infarction. Methods Sixty-nine consecutive patients (mean age 61 ± 14 years, 46 [67%] male) who did not receive thrombolytic therapy or undergo early revascularization were studied by echocardiography 1 week after Q-wave myocardial infarction. The absolute size of the region of abnormal wall motion (AWM) and the percentage of the endocardium involved (%AWM) were quantitated along with the wall motion score. A severity index was then derived as the mean wall motion score within the region of AWM. Site of myocardial infarction was classified as either anterior or inferior from the endocardial map. Left ventricular ejection fraction was measured by Simpson’s method with 2 apical views. Results  Twenty-nine (42%) patients had anterior and 40 had inferior myocardial infarction. The mean left ventricular ejection fraction was significantly lower in anterior than in inferior myocardial infarction (44.8% ± 11.5% vs 53% ± 8.6%; P = .001). The mean %AWM was greater in anterior than in inferior myocardial infarction (32.1 ± 15.5 vs 22.4 ± 14.1; P = .01). The mean wall motion score was greater in anterior than in inferior myocardial infarction (9.8 ± 6.4 vs 6.4 ± 4.4; P  = .01). The mean severity index did not differ by site. Multiple regression analysis demonstrated that, in descending order of importance, %AWM, extent of apical involvement, and site of myocardial infarction were independent determinants of global left ventricular ejection fraction. Conclusions For myocardial infarctions of similar size, left ventricular ejection fraction is lower when apical involvement is extensive and the site of infarction is anterior. This site-dependent difference may be related to characteristics specific to the apex. (Am Heart J 2000;140:284-90.)
