Background Clinical application of the color Doppler proximal isovelocity surface area (PISA) method to quantify mitral regurgitation (MR) has been limited by the often inaccurate assumption that isovelocity surfaces are hemispheric. This study applied an objective method for selecting the region where the hemispheric geometry holds best on the basis of mathematic analysis of results at different distances from the orifice. We aimed to demonstrate this approach can be applied accurately in the clinical setting and can be semiautomated to promote routine use by extracting velocities from the digital Doppler output and then performing all the calculations automatically. Methods In 75 patients with isolated MR, centerline velocities (Vr) at each distance (r) from the orifice in the proximal flow field were extracted digitally. The automated analysis calculated peak MR flow rates as 2πr2Vr and plotted these against their respective velocities. The optimal value for peak flow rate was obtained mathematically at the site where the slope of this curve was minimal (least inaccuracy). This value was combined with continuous wave Doppler data to provide regurgitant stroke volume (RSV) and orifice area (ROA), which were compared with quantitative Doppler in 75 patients and angiography in 42. Results RSV and ROA by this optimized, semiautomated PISA method correlated and agreed well with values from quantitative Doppler (y = 0.9x + 1.9, r = 0.90, standard error of the estimate [SEE] = 8.1 mL, mean DIFFERENCE = –0.7 ± 8.5 mL for RSV; y = 0.9x + 0.02, r = 0.90, SEE = 0.048 cm2, mean DIFFERENCE = –0.005 ± 0.1 cm2 for ROA) and correlated well with angiography (ρ = 0.90 for both RSV and ROA). Conclusions  This objective PISA method for quantifying MR is accurate in the clinical setting and has been semiautomated by use of analysis of digital velocity data to provide a rapid and practical technique suitable to facilitate more extensive application in routine practice. (Am Heart J 2001;141:653-60.)
