Study objective: To determine whether home use of syrup of ipecac is safe and effective in reducing pediatric emergency department visits.

Design: Retrospective, multicenter comparison based on secondary use of a large database. Participants: Children younger than 6 years after acute, accidental ingestion of a pharmaceutical product. Interventions: 1990 Data corresponding to the study patients from seven regional poison centers were obtained from the American Association of Poison Control Centers. Poison center management choices (particularly use of syrup of ipecac for home decontamination) and characteristics (distribution of pharmaceutical ingestions managed, work volume per staff, staff experience, and training of decision-making director) were analyzed for their impact on the decision to refer a patient to a health care facility or to manage the patient at home. Statistical techniques included weighted least-squares regression analysis using logistic transformation of dependent variables and the forward selection procedure. Adverse patient outcome was defined as moderate effect, major effect, or death (American Association of Poison Control Centers coding criteria). Results: In all, 55,436 children were included in the analysis (range, 3,839 to 12,691 per poison center). The distribution of medications ingested was similar among centers. Increased home use of syrup of ipecac, decreased frequency of ingestion of "high-risk" drugs, and increased staff experience were associated with decreased referral to a health care facility (P<.0001 for each variable). The forward selection procedure determined that syrup of ipecac use explained 45% of the variation in the poison center referral rates. The percentage of drugs defined as high-risk accounted for an additional 31%, and staff experience accounted for another 10% of the variation. Outcome of patients was excellent. No child died. Two home-managed patients had a major effect, and 26 had a moderate effect. Conclusion: Centers that recommended home use of syrup of ipecac more frequently were able to manage childhood poisoning more cost-effectively, without a decrease in safety. Although increased home management was strongly associated with syrup of ipecac use, the reason for this relationship cannot be determined from the data. Management by experienced professionals also contributed to cost-effectiveness. [Bond GR: Home use of syrup of ipecac is associated with a reduction in pediatric emergency department visits. Ann Emerg Med March 1995;25:338-343.]
