Study objective: To evaluate a program using health care preprofessional college students as research associates (RAs) to facilitate research in emergency medicine. Methods:  We developed a program using health care preprofessional college students as RAs in an urban ED with an emergency medicine residency program. RAs were recruited from four local colleges. Potential RAs were instructed during four 2-hour sessions on clinical research in emergency medicine, the ethical issues of confidentiality and informed consent, personal safety, and specifics on data collection for the individual studies. For the 13 weeks of the 1995 spring semester, each RA served one 4-hour shift in the ED each week. They identified patients who were eligible for the studies, began the informed-consent process, obtained nonclinical and historical information, and assisted the physicians in the study protocols. The RAs were evaluated on every shift by two faculty members from New York Medical College. The RAs were surveyed at the completion of the semester about their experiences with the program. Results: Forty-one students completed the orientation course and served at least one shift in the ED. Thirty-three completed more than 7 of 13 possible shifts and received credit for the semester. The average number of shifts served for all RAs was 9 (average numbers of shifts served by RAs receiving credit for the semester and RAs not receiving credit were 10.3 and 4, respectively). Two studies were completed during the semester, each with a significant increase in patient enrollment after the RAs' arrival. Three studies were ongoing at the end of the semester and had patient entries well above projected expectations. The principal investigators for the studies expressed their satisfaction with the RAs' productivity. The faculty evaluations were overwhelmingly positive, as were the results of the RA survey at the end of the semester. The cost of the program was minimal. Conclusion:  College students serving as research associates can be an economical and successful tool for clinical studies in the emergency department. [Bradley K, Osborn HH, Tang M: College research associates: A program to increase emergency medicine clinical research productivity. Ann Emerg Med September 1996;28:328-333.]
