Study objective: To determine patient understanding of how to properly gain access to urgent and emergency medical care under TennCare, a government-mandated managed health care initiative designed to replace Medicaid in Tennessee. Methods:  We prospectively surveyed a convenience sample of ED patients at university hospital ED with an annual census of 50,000 during two periods (summer 1994 and summer 1995). In 1994, 250 TennCare patients were enrolled (part 1). In 1995, 199 were enrolled (part 2). Results:  Patients from seven different TennCare managed care organizations (MCOs) were interviewed. Thirty-eight percent of part 1 patients and 37% of part 2 patients did not have or did not know the names of their primary care physicians (PCPs). Fifty-eight percent of the part 1 patients who knew their PCPs' names had never visited them. This figure had decreased to 25% by the time part 2 patients were surveyed. Seventy-three percent of part 1 patients interviewed did not call their PCPs before coming to the ED. This figure had decreased to 48% by the time part 2 patients were interviewed. Thirty-two percent of part 1 patients were aware that they were supposed to contact the PCP before visiting the ED, whereas 94% of part 2 patients were aware of this requirement. Thirty-one percent of part 1 patients and 40% of part 2 patients who tried to contact their PCPs were unsuccessful, most often because of a delay on the part of PCPs in returning calls. Fifty-six percent of part 1 patients and 69% of part 2 patients did not know that they might be held responsible for the bill if an ED visit was not considered a true emergency and was not approved by the MCO. Conclusion:  Improvements in communication of pertinent information must be implemented in managed care systems such as TennCare to better inform participants of the proper use of the system. MCOs will not reduce inappropriate use of the ED if patients are not aware of their responsibilities and do not know their PCPs or how to gain access to them. PCP responsiveness to patients must also be improved. [Young C, Meyer T, Wrenn K, Wright S, Ishihara K, Cross M, Grubbs R, Biddinger P, Penn D: Access to emergency care under TennCare: Do patients understand the system? Ann Emerg Med September 1997;30:281-285.]
