Study objective: To assess the relationship between the sum of ST-segment elevations (ST score) in the admission ECG and the occurrence of early complications in patients with acute myocardial infarction (MI). Methods:  We conducted an observational study of patients who presented with acute anterior or inferior MI to the ED of a 2,000-bed inner-city hospital. Age, sex, time from onset of pain and the start of thrombolysis, and ST score were evaluated by the emergency physician. “Early complications” were defined as acute congestive heart failure or severe rhythm disturbances in the 24 hours after the start of thrombolysis. The outcome measures were the relationship between ST score and the occurrence of early complications; the influence of age, sex, or time between onset of pain and thrombolysis; and identification of a cutoff value with the highest sensitivity and specificity for prediction of complications. Results:  We included 243 patients (194 men, 49 women; mean age, 56.6 years) with acute MI (anterior, 119; inferior, 124) who underwent thrombolysis in our analysis. ST score was significantly greater in patients with early complications, compared with patients without complications (anterior, 10.3 versus 19.4 mm [P<.001]; inferior, 6.9 versus 10.4 mm [P<.001]). Receiver-operator curve analysis revealed an ST score of 13 mm in patients with anterior MI and 9 mm in patients with inferior MI as the cutoff value with the greatest sensitivity and specificity for predicting early complications of MI. (For anterior MI, sensitivity was .79, specificity .73; for inferior MI, sensitivity was .64 and specificity .68.). On multivariate regression analysis, ST score was an independent predictor of the occurrence of at least one complication. (For anterior MI, the odds ratio [OR] was 9.7 and the 95% confidence interval [CI] 3.9 to 25.1; for inferior MI the OR was 5.0 and the 95% CI 2.0 to 12.8). Age, sex, and interval from onset of pain to treatment had no significant effect on the occurrence of early complications. Conclusion:  The absolute ST score is useful in estimating the probability of early complications in patients with acute MI receiving thrombolytic therapy. A cutoff value of 13 mm for anterior MI and 9 mm for inferior MI stratifies patients into high- and low-risk subgroups for the development of acute congestive heart failure and severe rhythm disturbances during the first 24 hours of hospitalization. [Gwechenberger M, Schreiber W, Kittler H, Binder M, Hohenberger B, Laggner A, Hirschl MM: Prediction of early complications in patients with acute myocardial infarction by calculation of the ST score. Ann Emerg Med November 1997; 30:563-570.]
