Study objective: To determine the HIV seroprevalence rates in relation to the demographic characteristics of victims, cause of death, and toxicology findings in a sample of victims of violence and accidents who presented to emergency departments before death.

Methods: This descriptive survey of a complete 3-year sample of homicides and accidents was conducted in 5 boroughs of New York City (population 7,322,564). Persons 15 years of age and older injured by intentional violence or accidents (excluding drug overdoses, falls from short heights, and suicides) who presented to hospitals, died, and were sent to the medical examiner were included. Standard methods were used to test plasma and serum samples for HIV and cocaine or its metabolite. χ2 Tests compared HIV seroprevalence across groups according to demographic characteristics and toxicology findings. Logistic regression analysis was done for those variables found to be significant with χ2 tests. All statistical tests were conducted with 2-tailed α levels of .05.

Results: Among the 1,242 subjects in the sample, 90 (7.2%) had positive findings. Male patients (8%) had higher rates than female patients (3.4%). HIV rates were highest among patients 35 to 44 years of age (20.8%), followed by the 45- to 54-year age group (9.6%) and 25- to 34-year age group (8.1%). Victims of homicide (8.2%) and accidents other than motor vehicle crashes (10.5%) had higher rates than victims of motor vehicle crashes (4%). Patients with positive results for cocaine (16.3%) were more likely than those with negative result (5.8%) to be HIV positive. There were no statistically significant differences by race, except that no Asians were HIV positive. Logistic regression analysis found that only age and positive cocaine results, not sex and race, were related to increased risk of HIV infection.

Conclusion: We found the rate of HIV infection among victims of fatal trauma was significant, especially in those with evidence of cocaine use. The HIV infection rate approximates the high end of the range of HIV rates found in studies before 1990. It further emphasizes the need for use of universal precautions in the care of trauma patients.

[Tardiff K, Marzuk PM, Leon AC, Hirsch CS, Portera L, Hartwell N: Human immunodeficiency virus among trauma patients in New York City. Ann Emerg Med August 1998;32:151-154.]
