We have developed an atmospheric correction algorithm to retrieve the surface bidirectional reflectance factor (BRF) and albedo from Multiangle Imaging SpectroRadiometer (MISR) measurements for small areas around Aerosol Robotic Network (AERONET) sunphotometer sites, using AERONET aerosol and column water vapor information. Our goal is to develop an indirect validation method for MISR surface reflectance products over heterogeneous land. Our algorithm makes independent retrievals with both the Li Sparse-Ross Thick kernel BRF model and the modified Rahman-Pinty-Verstraete BRF model used in the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer and MISR land algorithms, respectively. In this study, we report the first results of processing MISR Collection 4 data for 2003-2004 for two sites, Mongu, Zambia, and Greenbelt, MD. We found that MISR generally provides accurate retrievals of BRF and albedo in both clear and hazy atmospheric conditions, correctly reproducing the parameter time series and spatial distribution. We found that the MISR BRF, on average, is less anisotropic in the visible bands. The difference is greatest in the blue band, but decreases with increasing wavelength such that it is negligible in the near-IR band. This discrepancy originates in part in the MISR aerosol retrieval algorithm over heterogeneous land, which tends to select an aerosol model that favors spectrally invariant shapes of surface BRF. The other part of the discrepancy comes from the surface hemispherical-directional reflectance factor retrieval algorithm where the iteration loop that removes the diffuse atmospheric transmittance is currently turned off. Our initial results suggest that the MISR surface albedo is on average lower than our retrievals by about 0.005 in the green and red bands. In the near-IR, it agreed with our retrievals with the modified Rahman-Pinty-Verstraete model for the Mongu site, but was systematically lower over the Greenbelt site by about 0.016. When significant- - aerosol absorption is present (Mongu), the albedo discrepancy is additionally biased by the difference between the MISR and AERONET retrievals of aerosol absorption
