The objective of this study was to assess the effect of dietary saponins, extracted from the plant Quillaja saponaria, on the concentrations of immunoglobulins in sow colostrum and milk, and additionally to observe any effect on piglet performance. Twenty-two sows were allocated to each of two dietary treatments on day 72 of gestation, balancing for parity, fatness and past reproductive performance. Treatments were : control (C) and supplemented (Q; 2·5 g saponin per day as a top-dressing). Sows received 2·5 kg food once per day throughout gestation. Between days 72 and 93 of gestation Q sows received a saponin top-dressing as described. After day 93, all sows were given the same diet and managed in an identical manner. Colostrum samples were taken from all sows at farrowing on delivery of the first piglet then 4, 8, 24 and 72 h later and again on day 21 of lactation. A group of eight sows from each treatment were also blood sampled at farrowing, day 3 and day 21 of lactation. Concentrations of immunoglobulins IgG and IgA in the colostrum, milk and blood were not affected by sow treatment during gestation at any sampling point. Fat, lactose and cell counts were also similar across treatments in colostrum and milk. Protein tended to be higher in milk on day 3 but lower on day 21 (P < 0·1) in Q sows. Piglet performance was not affected by sow treatment during week 1 of lactation. However pigs suckling Q sows grew more slowly between days 8 to 14 (P < 0·05) and days 15 to 21 (P < 0·1). Q sows also had fewer stillborn piglets in their litters at farrowing (7·67 v. 13·25%, P < 0·05, s.e. = 1·93). It is concluded that dietary quillaja saponin given during this time period has no influence on sow lacteal immunoglobulin secretions. However an adverse effect on performance of the sucking piglet was observed, the reasons for which are unclear, but may be related to reduced milk protein concentrations. Dietary quillaja saponin during gestation does however appear to reduce the incidence of stillborn piglets.
