Study objective: We sought to evaluate whether patients with epistaxis in the emergency department have a higher arterial blood pressure compared with patients with other medical emergencies and to study the association of elevated blood pressure during epistaxis with sustained arterial hypertension. Methods:  In a prospective, cross-sectional, prevalence study we compared arterial blood pressure on admission in the ED in 213 consecutive patients treated for epistaxis with that of 213 sex- and age-matched control subjects. In 33 of those patients with elevated blood pressure during epistaxis, we evaluated the prevalence of sustained arterial hypertension. Main outcome measures were arterial blood pressure during epistaxis and evidence of sustained arterial hypertension, as determined by 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure measurement. Results:  Patients with epistaxis had significantly higher blood pressure values compared with those of control patients (systolic blood pressure 161±30 versus 144±22 mm Hg, P <.001; diastolic blood pressure 84±19 versus 75±15 mm Hg, P  <.001). Of 33 (30%) of 108 patients with elevated blood pressure during epistaxis who were further evaluated, 26 (79%) patients were classified as having sustained arterial hypertension. Nine (27%) patients with sustained arterial hypertension were unaware of a history of hypertension. Patients with sustained arterial hypertension had significantly more episodes of epistaxis compared with patients with elevated blood pressure during epistaxis and no sustained arterial hypertension (mean 5 versus 1; P =.004). Conclusion:  Patients with epistaxis have a higher blood pressure compared with that of control patients. Twenty-six (79%) of 33 patients with elevated blood pressure during epistaxis had sustained arterial hypertension. Nine (27%) of these patients were unaware of a history of hypertension. Continued management of patients with epistaxis and high blood pressure should include confirmation or exclusion of sustained arterial hypertension by 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure recording. [Herkner H, Laggner AN, Müllner M, Formanek M, Bur A, Gamper G, Woisetschläger C, Hirschl MM. Hypertension in patients presenting with epistaxis. Ann Emerg Med . February 2000;35:126-130.]
