Study Objective: We sought to determine whether the reliability of clinical evaluation for pelvic bone fracture after trauma is compromised by a serum ethanol level of 100 mg/dL or greater. Methods: This is a retrospective case control study of trauma registry patients presenting from October 1, 1995, to March 31, 1997, to an urban level I trauma center. Inclusion criteria were as follows: blunt trauma, age 13 years or older, and Glasgow Coma Scale score of 13 or greater. Exclusion criteria were as follows: isolated penetrating injury and suspected spinal injury. Patients were separated into 2 groups: those with an ethanol level of 100 mg/dL or greater, and those with an ethanol level of less than 100 mg/dL. Physician performance in clinical identification of pelvic bone fracture by using a complaint of pain, pelvic tenderness, with or without deformity, was compared between the 2 groups. Results: Seven hundred sixty-three patients met inclusion criteria. Fifty-five (7.2%) patients had a pelvic fracture, 75% of which were isolated acetabulum or pubic ramus fractures. Two hundred six control patients without pelvic fractures were randomly selected. The sensitivity and specificity of the complaint of pain and tenderness, deformity, or both for identification of a pelvic fracture was not significantly different between the ethanol groups. Five (9%) of 55 patients with pelvic fractures had neither a complaint of pain nor bony tenderness or deformity on examination. This was not statistically associated with an ethanol level of 100 mg/dL or greater (P=1.000). Conclusion:  In our study, clinical evaluation for pelvic fracture in trauma patients with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 13 or greater was not compromised by an ethanol level of 100 mg/dL or greater. The most common reason for clinically missed pelvic fractures was the presence of additional painful distracting injuries. [Tien IY, Dufel SE. Does ethanol affect the reliability of pelvic bone examination in blunt trauma? Ann Emerg Med. November 2000;36:451-455.]
