Study Objective: The American Heart Association protocols for use of automated external defibrillators (AEDs) recommend that a rhythm analysis be done immediately after each defibrillation attempt. However, shock is often followed by electrical silence or marginally organized electrical activity before ventricular fibrillation (VF) or ventricular tachycardia (VT) recurs. The optimal timing of postshock analysis for identification of recurrent VF/VT is unknown. This study examines the time to recurrence of VF/VT after a defibrillation attempt with AED. Methods: Over an 18-month period, all tapes from patients with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest who received shocks at least once with an AED were screened for recurrent VF/VT. All cases come from a single emergency medical services system providing basic life support, defibrillation with AED, and intubation with an esophageal-tracheal twin-lumen airway device (Combitube) for a population of 633,511 individuals. Pediatric and traumatic cases were excluded. When VF/VT recurred within 3 minutes of the defibrillation attempt, rhythm strips were printed and included in the study. Two cardiology fellows, blinded to the study objectives, measured the time from defibrillation to recurrent VF/VT for each strip. Results: Over the study period, 222 tapes from 96 patients met the inclusion criteria. Only 44 (20%) occurrences of VF/VT had recurred within 6 seconds of defibrillation, 162 (73%) at 60 seconds, and 200 (90%) at 90 seconds. Conclusion: Eighty percent of VF/VT recurred more than 6 seconds after defibrillation and were missed when using current American Heart Association AED protocols. Subsequent analysis should be postponed until at least 30 seconds after defibrillation. Performing 30 seconds of chest compressions after defibrillation before subsequent AED rhythm analysis would increase AED identification of VF/VT to 52%. [Blouin D, Topping C, Moore S, Stiell I, Afilalo M. Out-of-hospital defibrillation with automated external defibrillators: postshock analysis should be delayed. Ann Emerg Med. September 2001;38:256-261.]
