Study objective
Unintended pregnancy is a major medical, social, and public health problem. Emergency contraceptive pills can prevent 75% to 85% of unintended pregnancies if administered within 72 hours of intercourse. We perform this study to measure knowledge, attitudes, practices, and perceived needs about emergency contraception in a sample of women seeking emergency department (ED) care.
Methods
This was a prospective survey of women presenting to an inner-city ED during an 8-week study period. Women who were aged 18 to 45 years, English speaking, and not critically ill and who presented during 56 randomly generated 4-hour time blocks were eligible. Trained research assistants administered a 20-question survey that included questions on current sexual and contraceptive practices and knowledge, acceptance, and preferences about postcoital contraception.
Results
Two hundred thirty-two women met eligibility criteria; 158 (68%) women agreed to participate. Participants and nonparticipants were similar in age, race, ethnicity, and insurance status. The participants' mean age was 30 years. Twenty-five percent were married, whereas 49% had never married and 25% were separated or divorced. Fifty-two percent (95% confidence interval [CI] 44% to 60%) reported at least 1 previous unintended pregnancy; 28% (95% CI 21% to 35%) had 1 or more previous elective abortions. Of women who had been sexually active in the past month, half (47%) reported unprotected intercourse during that time. Among all respondents, 122 (77%; 95% CI 71% to 84%) had heard of emergency contraception as a way of preventing pregnancy after unprotected intercourse. Of these respondents, one fourth to one half did not have enough knowledge to use emergency contraceptive pills effectively. Fifty-seven percent of women were willing to use emergency contraceptive pills in the future, and 16 women said they would consider a change in regular contraception to emergency contraceptive pills if widely available.
Conclusion
Sexually active women seeking ED care have high rates of unintended pregnancy and abortion. There is broad acceptance of emergency contraceptive pills to prevent pregnancy, but knowledge of availability, timing, and proper use is limited. Emergency contraceptive pills are a safe, effective, and low-cost primary preventive and emergency care intervention, and information about their use should be made available to ED patients. Patients should be advised not to abandon their use of barrier or other traditional contraceptives.

