Titanium is known for its biocompatibility and is widely used in dental and orthopedic reconstructive surgery. There are reports that osteointegration of these implants is not optimal. The objective of this study was to modify titanium dioxide particles and examine the resultant effects on protein adsorption to these altered surfaces using a model cell binding protein, human plasma fibronectin (HPF). HPF is an important matrix glycoprotein that plays a major role in cell and protein attachment. Titanium dioxide surfaces were modified by heating the titanium dioxide powder at 800°C for 1 h or treating with an oxidizing agent: peroxide in ammonium hydroxide followed by peroxide in hydrochloric acid. Oxidized and control samples were further treated with 9:1 butanol:water for 30 min. Brunauer–Emmett–Teller showed no change in particle surface area as a result of thermal or chemical treatment. Hydrophobicity increased with butanol treatment of titanium dioxide. Diffuse reflectance Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy showed the presence of ---CH2 and ---CH3 vibrations in the region of 2850–3000 cm−1 for both the heated/butanol and peroxide/butanol-treated samples. The absence of increased C---O and O---C=O features as determined by electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis indicates that butanol adsorption is not occurring via an esterification mechanism. The interaction between butanol and pre-heated or peroxide-treated titanium dioxide may be one of association (weak electrostatic and/or Van der Waals forces) rather than direct ionic bonding. Maximum HPF adsorption on modified or unmodified titanium dioxide occurred within 30 min, with greater protein adsorption occurring on butanol-treated samples. Desorption was minimal with all modifications. Zeta potential measurements showed that HPF adsorption caused an increase in the negative zeta potential with the greatest change noted for the butanol-treated samples. These findings suggest that wettability and surface charge both play an important role in protein adsorption to titanium dioxide. Thus, by modifying the physico-chemical properties of titanium dioxide surfaces, it may be possible to alter protein adsorption and hence optimize cell attachment.
