The objective of this study was to study the responses of osteoblast-like cells to rough Titanium (Ti)-coated epoxy surfaces of differing topographic complexity. Four topographies were studied: polished (PO), coarse-blasted (CB), acid-etched (AE) and coarse-blasted+acid-etched (SLA). Rat osteoblasts were cultured on these surfaces and their morphology, thickness as well as the number and size of bone-like nodules measured. To determine cell shape and cell thickness, fluorescein-5-thiosemicarbazide was used to stain the cell components including the cell membrane, the stained cells were optically sectioned using epifluorescent microscopy and the optical sections were computationally reconstructed to obtain three-dimensional images in which cell volume and cell thickness could be determined. Similarly optical sections of bone-like nodules labeled with tetracycline were also reconstructed to determine their size. The different surface topographies were found to alter the thickness and morphology of osteoblasts cultured on these surfaces. Osteoblasts produced significantly more and larger nodules on SLA compared to other surfaces . Nevertheless and perhaps surprisingly, given the evidence in various cell populations that cell shape can affect cell differentiation, cell thickness was not directly correlated with an increase in bone-like nodule formation. Data were analyzed by factorial analysis of variance. In this way the primary effect of each surface treatment ( i.e. blasting and acid etching) could be assessed as well as their interaction. Both the acid etching and blasting processes significantly affected the number and size of bone-like nodules cultured on Ti surfaces. Moreover there were significant interaction effects indicating that surface topographic features can act synergistically to enhance bone formation. This result suggests that a useful approach to the optimization of surfaces for bone production could involve systematic investigation of combinations of processes each of which produces distinct surface topographical features.
