Background
Previous studies of stress in healthcare staff have indicated a probable high prevalence of distress. Whether this distress can be attributed to the stressful nature of the work situation is not clear. No previous study has used a detailed interview method to ascertain the link between stress in and outside of work and anxiety and depressive disorders.
Methods

Doctors, nurses, and administrative and ancillary staff were screened using the general health questionnaire (GHQ). High scorers (GHQ>4) and matched individuals with low GHQ scores were interviewed by means of the clinical interview schedule to ascertain definite anxiety and depressive disorders (cases). Cases and controls, matched for age, sex, and occupational group were interviewed with the life events and difficulties schedule classification and an objective measure of work stress to find out the amount of stress at work and outside of work. Sociodemographic and stress variables were entered into a logistic-regression analysis to find out the variables associated with anxiety and depressive disorders.
Findings

64 cases and 64 controls were matched. Cases and controls did not differ on demographic variables but cases were less likely to have a confidant (odds ratio 0·09 [95% CI 0·01–0·79]) and more likely to have had a previous episode of psychiatric disorder (3·07 [1·10–8·57]). Cases and controls worked similar hours and had similar responsibility but cases had a greater number of objective stressful situations both in and out of work (severe event or substantial difficulty in and out of work—45 cases vs 18 controls 6·05 [2·81–13·00], p<0·001; severe chronic difficulty outside of work—27 vs 8, 5·12 [2·09–12·46], p<0·001). Cases had significantly more objective work problems than controls (median 6 vs 4, z=3·81, p<0·001). The logistic-regression analyses indicated that even after the effects of personal vulnerability to psychiatric disorder and ongoing social stress outside of work had been taken into account, stressful situations at work contributed to anxiety and depressive disorders.
Interpretation

Both stress at work and outside of work contribute to the anxiety and depressive disorders experienced by healthcare staff. Our findings suggest that the best way to decrease the prevalence of these disorders is individual treatment, which may focus on personal difficulties outside of work, combined with organisational attempts to reduce work stress. The latter may involve more assistance for staff who have a conflict between their managerial role and clinical role.
