This article deals with the interrelation of ecological and economic aspects through the use of indicators. Two aspects are painted out: the first being the measurement of the economic value of ecological services, and the second being the integration of economic aspects into comprehensive indicator systems. The measurement of the economic value provides a means of determining consumer-orientated values of landscapes and bio-diversity issues. This measurement, however, is viewed critically by some, especially in nature conservancy circles. For them the intrinsic values of a landscape, which cannot be measured in economic terms, play the central role in the assessment of landscapes [[Hampicke, 1998]]. On the other hand, Braeuers [Money as an indicator: to make use of economic evaluation for biodiversity conservation. In: Buechs, W. (Ed.), Biotic Indicators for Biodiversity and Sustainable Agriculture. Agric. Ecosys. Environ.], whose article presents an overview of current economic assessment methods, provides an alternate point of view. Braeuer [Money as an indicator: to make use of economic evaluation for biodiversity conservation. In: Buechs, W. (Ed.), Biotic Indicators for Biodiversity and Sustainable Agriculture. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.] argues that through the inclusion of monetary values into the assessment process the whole issue can remain on a factual level. The article by Gerowitt et al. [Rewards for ecological goods--requirements and perspectives for agricultural land use. In: Buechs, W. (Ed.), Biotic Indicators for Biodiversity and Sustainable Agriculture. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.] even goes further and suggests that a market oriented system be implemented for environmental goods. In contrast to the subjective measurement of economic value, land use models are based on "objective" expertise. Aim of the articles in this sector is to analyse the enhancement of scientific models by economic aspects. These models would then be used to verify the feasibility of ecological motivated land use claims. The results would form the basis for political decision making by a society. The model of Meyer-Aurich and Zander [Consideration of biotic environmental quality targets in agricultural land use--a case study from the biosphere reserve Schorfheide-Chorin. In: Buechs, W. (Ed.), Biotic Indicators for Biodiversity and Sustainable Agriculture. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.] reviews land use decision making on the operational level, while the model of Herrmann et al. [Threshold values for nature protection areas as indicators for bio-diversity--a regional evaluation of economic and ecological consequences. In: Buechs, W. (Ed.), Biotic Indicators for Biodiversity and Sustainable Agriculture. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.] reviews decision making at a regional level. The concluding article by Kantelhardt et al. [Is there a reliable correlation between hedgerow density and agricultural site conditions? In: Buechs, W. (Ed.), Biotic Indicators for Biodiversity and Sustainable Agriculture. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.] attempts to correlate selected different economic and ecological indicators. The key issue here being how farmers can be compensated for the conservation and preservation of landscapes.
