Objective: The endolymphatic sac (ES) of vertebrates contains varying amounts of a homogeneous substance (HS) that stains deeply with basic aniline dyes. Histochemically, HS is characterized as a carbohydrate–protein complex, being both neutral and acidic in nature. In the present study, deposition of HS in the ES was studied in the guinea pig from the 3rd week of gestation to 104 weeks postnatally in order to find out if HS accumulates with age, at which point during embryonic development this substance appears, if its presence is correlated to the sense of hearing and if the amount of substance in the left versus right ear of one and the same animal is correlated to any degree.
Methods: Sixty-nine endolymphatic sacs were evaluated in 38 guinea pigs. The ES specimens were sectioned for light and transmission electron microscopy and the amount of HS filling was categorized in four groups: none, low, medium and a high level of substance.
Results: The substance was not discerned until after 7 weeks of gestation, when it filled only a minor part of the distal ES lumen. At 9 weeks gestation the nature of the substance altered, becoming homogeneous, as visualized by osmium–toluidine blue staining and approximately filling the distal half of the luminal space. In the postnatal period, 65% of ES specimens were filled with HS to the intermediate or proximal ES, whereas only 6.5% of the ES specimens were devoid of the substance. The extent of filling of the ES in the prenatal temporal bones was significantly less than postnatally (P<0.0001, χ2-test). The extent of postnatal filling was not correlated with age. Left and right ears were closely correlated in one and the same animal. Phagocytic cells were often found at the border between clear endolymph and stainable substance.
Conclusion: The appearance of HS seemed to coincide temporally with the onset of hearing during the prenatal period indicating that it could play a part in normal inner ear functioning in the guinea pig. The close correlation regarding the level of the HS in the left and right ear, both pre- and postnatally could reflect a general symmetry in endolymph pressure–volume conditions within the inner ear fluid systems, as well as in the environmental hydrostatic pressure in the posterior cranial fossa.

