Objective: Nasal T/natural killer cell lymphomas (NTCL) are highly prevalent among Oriental populations. However the characteristic immunophenotype of NTCL is still controversial and it can be difficult to make a firm histologic diagnosis of malignancy. Therefore, 14 cases of NTCL in patients from southern Japan were evaluated for clinicopathological features and immunophenotypic status. Furthermore, the genetic variations in the latent membrane protein 1 (LMP-1) gene of Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-related NTCL were evaluated. Methods: Biopsy specimens were fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin before examination using in situ hybridization for EBV-encoded RNA-1 (EBER-1) as well as immunohistochemical staining for CD3, CD3 , CD4, CD8, CD43, CD45RA, and CD45RO. To detect genetic variations, single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis and DNA sequencing were applied. Results: Clinically, 14 cases were divided into two groups. The first group consisting of eight patients showed good prognosis. The other group consisting of six patients showed poor prognosis. The vast majority of neoplastic cells in NTCL were EBER-1 positive. These cells did not express CD4, CD8, or CD45RA, but often expressed CD43 and CD45RO. In addition, they were negative for CD3 when stained with a mouse monoclonal antibody but stained for CD3  when a rabbit polyclonal was used. The 3′-terminal of LMP-1 gene of seven cases were amplified and all of them have 30 base pair (bp) deletion. Conclusion: NTCL are a heterogeneous mix of cell types although EBV-associated NTCL in patients from southern Japan appear to originate from natural killer cells rather than T cells, and also prognosis is variable and not always poor. The ability to make a firm diagnosis can be enhanced through the combined use of in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. High prevalence of the 30-bp deletions of the LMP-1 gene in EBV-related NTCL may also reflect the prevalence of the deletion variant in the normal population in Japan.
