Objective: It has been reported that spontaneous otoacoustic emission (SOAE) can prolong the responses or increase the echo power of transiently evoked otoacoustic emission (TEOAE), yet the effects of SOAE on distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAE) have been studied less thoroughly. As most of the previous studies have not paid attention to the patient's age, sex and hearing level, they have not reflected possible effects of those factors. We studied the effects of SOAE specifically on DPOAE in the following subjects. Subjects and methods: The subjects were all females ranging in age from 19 to 24 (average: 21.4) and the 78 ears had a hearing threshold under 15 dB for 1, 2, and 4 kHz on pure-tone hearing test. IL088 (Otodynamics) was used for measurement of SOAE and IL092 (Otodynamics) for DPOAE. SOAEs were measured by time-averaging over 100 of the responses, of which those showing a clear peak 3 dB above the noise floor and being reproducible were considered as SOAE-positive. In all the ears, DPOAE responses were measured at L1=L2=70 dB, and in 42 ears also at L1=L2=60 dB and L1/L2=60/50 dB. The subjected ears were grouped into two by the presence or the absence of SOAE, and DPOAE amplitudes of 1, 2, and 4 kHz were compared, respectively. Results: Of the total, 39 ears were SOAE-positive and 39 SOAE-negative. Statistically no significant difference was observed in the average hearing level between the SOAE-positive and SOAE-negative groups. The hearing levels did not significantly differ in the frequencies of 1, 2, and 4 kHz, respectively, indicating that influence of the hearing level on DPOAE could be excludable. DPOAE amplitudes at L1=L2=70 dB in the frequencies of 1, 2, and 4 kHz were higher in the SOAE-positive group than in the SOAE-negative group. And DPOAE amplitudes were also higher in SOAE-positive group at L1=L2=60 dB and L1/L2=60/50 dB in the frequency of 1, 2, and 4 kHz, but significant differences were observed only in the frequencies of 4 kHz. By grouping the ears by the number of SOAE, we revealed the tendency that the larger the number of SOAE, the higher the DPOAE amplitudes. Conclusions: We evidenced that SOAE has significant effects on DPOAE responses. In clinical application of DPOAE measurement, therefore, the effects should be seriously taken into account.
