Objective: The purpose of this work was to collect a surgically obtained, freshly fixed material of the human intraosseous endolymphatic sac. This biopsy material was used to describe the normal ultrastructure as well as to serve as a control material for histopathological studies on Ménière’s disease in particular. Method: The specimens, obtained during surgery for cerebello-pontine angle tumours, were fixed by immersion and then prepared by routine methods for transmission electron microscopy. The ultrastructural analysis was focused on intraluminal content, epithelial cell layer, subepithelial space, and morphological signs of immunological activity. The ultrastructure was analysed in relation to inner ear sensory function, tumour diagnosis, and patient’s age and sex. Results: As it was possible to obtain numerous specimens with an intact bony shell, the intraluminal substance could be analysed. Two separate epithelial cell types are described: one less abundant, often lighter and mitochondria-rich cell type; the other, often darker, epithelial cell with fever mitochondrias. Some of the latter cell types showed signs of active secretion. The subepithelial space was characterized by loose connective tissue adjacent to the epithelial lining, being more dense toward the bone. Elastic fibres were seen surrounding the entire endolymphatic sac. Macrophages in the intraluminal space and lymphocytes in the epithelial and subepithelial layers are described. No distinct morphology correlating to inner ear sensory function, tumour diagnosis, or patient’s age and sex was revealed. Conclusions: This study confirms previously described, extensive variations in form and structure of the human endolymphatic sac. Various factors, such as surgical trauma, previous treatment, and processing method, can affect the ultrastructure and must be taken into consideration. The specimens described in this work appear to constitute a good control material for histopathological study of the human endolymphatic sac. It is still necessary to obtain large control materials such as this, as surgical specimens from patients with Ménière’s disease are uncommon.
