Objective: Since the majority of the key elements such as trigeminal nerves, parasympathetic nerves, nasal glands, and blood vessels targeted by histamine and leukotrienes are found in the lamina propria of the nasal mucosa, its selective electrocautery has a rationale to improve the symptoms of allergic rhinitis with preservation of epithelial layer. To achieve the above goal, we performed the submucous electrocautery of the lamina propria (SECLP) following the submucous resection of the inferior turbinate bone (submucous turbinectomy: SMT). This paper discusses the efficacy of this procedure for the patients with persistent perennial allergic rhinitis. Methods: An intranasal initial incision was made along the piriform aperture. The mucoperiosteum was elevated from the inferior turbinate bone followed by its complete resection. The SECLP was performed by applying a high-frequency coagulation current with a ball tip electrode, which was inserted into the mucoperiosteal sack after the completion of the SMT and was drawn forward on the medial surface of the mucoperiosteum with drawing a wavy line. We performed this surgery in 43 patients with perennial allergic rhinitis who were refractory to pharmacotherapy or were reluctant to take medicine. Symptoms, macroscopic intranasal findings, the results of allergic tests, nasal resistance, mucociliary function with saccharin, and the number of mast cells were compared pre- and postoperatively. Results: The patients exhibited satisfactory improvement in symptoms only with a few crust formations. The macroscopic intranasal findings and allergic tests improved after surgery. Saccharin transport time remained normal. The number of anti-tryptase positive mast cells significantly decreased in the epithelial layer and in the superficial layer of the lamina propria of the postoperative inferior turbinate mucosa. Conclusion: The SECLP following the SMT is evaluated to be a useful surgical modality for allergic rhinitis with preservation of the nasal mucosal function.
