Objective Supracricoid laryngectomy (SCL) with Cricohyoidoepiglotto-pexy (CHEP) or Cricohyoido-pexy (CHP) is an organ preservation surgery indicated for early and selected advanced laryngeal cancers. To verify the clinical usefulness of supracricoid laryngectomy versus total laryngectomy, a retrospective review was conducted.
Methods We summarized the clinical and postoperative data of 32 patients who received SCL over the past 9 years (1997–2005). Five-year survival rate of the SCL patient group (29 cases) was compared with that of the patient group receiving total laryngectomy (35 cases) within the same period.
Results Wound infection was detected in 12 patients (38%). Those with severe infection, which required surgical intervention, included two cases of ruptured pexis and two cases showing cricoid cartilage necrosis induced by Forestier disease. There were two T4 cases that resulted in extensive excision. In one case, excision involved the posterior part of the cricoid cartilage resulting in insufficient closure of the neoglottis; the patient received total laryngectomy 30 months after SCL–CHEP because of persistent aspiration of liquid diet. In the other T4 case, the tumor invaded the thyroid and arytenoid cartilages but not the cricoid cartilage. Reposition of the remaining corniculate cartilage resulted in sufficient closure of the neoglottis; this patient subsequently acquired satisfactory laryngeal function. The 5-year overall survival rate was 86% for SCL group and 61% for the total laryngectomy group (limited to Stages III and IV glottic cancers). The causes of the four deaths were distant metastasis, neck metastasis, and intercurrent disease, respectively. Two patients are alive with distant disease.
Conclusion Through our experience in this series, the functional and oncological results of SCL showed certain advantages over those of total laryngectomy. Particularly, the clinical impact of SCL–CHEP was impressive; this technique needs is recommended to both head and neck surgeons and patients.

