Background/Aims: The pathway through which iron contributes to liver cell damage and cirrhosis in genetic hemochromatosis is not clear. The objective of the present study was to describe the ultrastructural changes in liver biopsies of patients in various stages of this condition and to correlate these with clinical, histopathological and biochemical data.
Methods: Liver biopsies from 20 patients with genetic hemochromatosis were examined by transmission electron microscopy. The use of unstained thin (60 nm) sections facilitated the identification and localization of the electron-opaque compounds of ferritin and hemosiderin in various liver cells. Stained thin sections permitted evaluation of the concomitant subcellular damage and collagen deposition. The ultrastructural observations were corroborated with the histopathological findings and biochemical data.
Results: All patients had liver iron overload, which was classified as mild, moderate or severe. In the stage of mild overload (hepatic iron concentration HIC 93.5±23.3 μmol/g and hepatic iron index HII 2.3±0.7), cytosolic ferritin and scarce pericanalicular lysosomes (siderosomes) were seen in periportal hepatocytes (acinar zone 1), without evidence of organelle damage, and in the absence of sinusoidal cell siderosis. In moderate overload (HIC 190.8± 41.5 μmol/g and HII 4.3±1.9), ferritin was identified in hepatocytes of all acinar zones, and the pericanalicular siderosomes were abundant, especially in acinar zone 1. Single hepatocytes showed organelle damage and occasional sinusoidal cells showed siderosis. In severe overload (HIC 308±49.0 μmol/g and HII 7.5±1.7), hepatocytes of all acinar zones were-filled with large, hemosiderin-containing siderosomes, and changes in mitochondria, smooth and rough endoplasmic reticulum and nuclei were conspicuous. Marked sinusoidal cell siderosis and collagen deposition were observed predominantly in this stage.
Conclusions: Electron microscopy has shown that during the long, latent stage of “compensated” genetic hemochromatosis, hepatocytes display only minimal subcellular changes, other than iron overload. “Decompensated” overload, characterized by extensive subcellular pathology and focal necrosis, is reached when 1) the hepatocytic siderosis is generalized (i.e. beyond pericanalicular polarization of siderosomes in hepatocytes, and beyond zone 1 in the acinus); and 2) there is evidence of massive siderosis of sinusoidal cells. These findings support the concept of a critical level of hepatic iron concentration beyond which organelle damage is conspicuous and liver cell injury may become irreversible.

