Numerous inquiries have been received concerning the publications policy to be followed after the merger of AIEE and IRE. Although this policy was published as Article XIV of the \´^Principles of Consolidation" in the supplement to the April issues of Electrical Engineering and Proceedings of the IRE, it seems wise to restate it briefly for the benefit of all members. IEEE will publish for a transition period of one year (the calendar year 1963) both Electrical Engineering and the Proceedings of the IRE in substantially their present form, with additional material on IEEE news, abstracts, and other information of interest to the general membership. This transition period may be extended for an additional period of up to one year by the IEEE Board of Directors. During this transition period, members of IRE at the time of merger (January 1, 1963) will receive only the Proceedings and members of AIEE at that time will receive only Electrical Engineering. Members of both Institutes at the time of merger, and new members of the IEEE, will receive one of these two publications at their choice. Any member may subscribe to the alternative publication. The policy to be followed subsequent to this transition period will be the subject of intensive study by an Editorial Committee to be appointed by the IEEE Board of Directors immediately following the date of merger. The objective of this study will be to devise policy and procedures to satisfy the needs of the IEEE membership for publications of high technical quality and broad general interest. The IEEE will publish Transactions produced by the Professional Technical Groups (including the present IRE Professional Groups and the AIEE Institute Technical Groups) and will also publish periodicals sponsored by the IEEE Technical Operating Committee (the successor to the AIEE Technical Operating Department). IEEE will publish a periodical for student members containing technical material and news items. Other publications, such - s a Directory of Members with lists of manufacturers, products, and supplies; Convention and Conference Records; Cumulative Indexes; Standards, etc., will be published when warranted.
