The Oriental nose, which has been broadly classified, as mesorrhine, differs in anatomy andmorphology from other racial groups. The objective of this study is to carry out anthropometric measurements in the nose region, in order to establish norms for the Oriental nose and also to identify the variations that might occur within this group. Knowledge of the unique shape, anatomy and dimensions of the Oriental nose would be very useful for surgeons undertaking repair and reconstruction of Oriental noses.

Ninety, normal Oriental subjects were scanned using a laser surface scanner, and the assessments were then carried out on the laser scan images. The 3-D laser scan images permit adjustment and positioning to achieve the correct standard views for assessment. Subjective assessment of the nose shape, as well as linear and angular measurements were carried out.

Depending on the fullness and roundness of the nasal tip and the prominence of the alar lobules on either side,the Oriental nasal base may take on varied shapes and accordingly, three distinct shapes have been identified. They have been classified into types A, B and C where type A has a very prominent alar lobule and a full and rounded nasal tip. In type B, the alar lobule was less prominent and the nasal tip was more defined while in type C the alar lobule was the least prominent resulting in the lateral walls forming a relatively straight slope from the tip to the alar base.

The linear and angular measurements for Oriental noses were also obtained and compared to values for other racial groups. The proportion indices for the Oriental nose showed that it was broader in relation to the nose height, and had less tip protrusion in relation to both the height and width of the nose.

The data collected from this study can be used as norms, for Oriental cases and the simple classification of the nose shape will serve as a guide for quick reference, when planning aesthetic or reconstructive rhinoplasties for the Oriental patient.
