This paper discusses about the TMS - telecommunication management suite designed for wireless opto wavelengths (WOW) principle. TMS- WOW is a new concept in the telecom and networking technologies. TMS is a new suite designed by merging different layers of the OSI model. TMS layered approach reduces the present overheads of the telecommunication systems at various layers by merging the operations of the low level OSI layers. This paper discusses on the approaches of a new TMS layered architecture and a WOW principle at Layer 1. WOW is just an approach for TMS layered architecture, which defines the new era of communication technology at Layer 1. WOW´s basic goal is to design a suite of applications for the telecommunication systems in order to provide an efficient bandwidth utilization and faster communication. The ideology behind WOW is achieved by combining Wireless and Optical Waves in the network communication. WOW uses the wavelength masking and wavelength subnetting at Layer 1. The Layer 3 principles are bought down to Layer 1. The main objective stresses on using wavelengths rather than internet lines. For operations like wavelength masking, subnetting and routing a special device called WOW devices are designed at the Layer 1. WOW devices can be configured with WOWSoft. WOWSoft is software installed on the all WOW devices to configure them. The design of the WOW device, WOWSoft and its functionality are out of the scope of this paper. In brief, WOW devices are Layer 1 devices which will receive an optical signal (1530 nm) in the range of L-Band and masks the optical wavelength and subnet the masked wavelengths into the network. WOW devices are responsible for mapping optical signal into wireless signals and vice versa. This paper also discusses the principle of wavelength masking, wavelength subnetting, their implementations and the Layered architecture of the TMS along with the advantages of the connection mechanism with ANA-Black Box designed for all opti- cal CPU. We will discuss on the efficiency of the TMS layer over OSI / TCP / IP layers.
