With more than 90 percent of the world´s ocean still unmapped and unexplored, the need for ocean exploration has never been more critical. NOAA´s Office of Ocean Exploration and Research (OER) provides NOAA and the Nation with a unique capability to discover and investigate new ocean areas and phenomena and to conduct the basic research required to capitalize on discoveries. In 2002 NOAA´s Office of Ocean Exploration (now part of OER) initiated a joint effort with NOAA´s Data Centers and other partners to form an Integrated Product Team (IPT) for Data Management for the Ocean Exploration Program. The IPT researched and documented a strategic approach, and has since implemented an ?End-to-End? (E2E) Information Management System to ensure that the scientific data and value-added data products produced as a result of NOAA´s exploration program are appropriately managed. The cornerstone of the E2E System is the Cruise Information Management System, an open source, custom software suite designed to aggregate information collected from OER´s expedition planning and operational processes into standard documentation formats (e.g., metadata records). In step with the new sensor suites and technical capacity available aboard the NOAA Ship Okeanos Explorer (EX), CIMS capabilities are currently being extended to address new data management challenges resulting from the new technologies aboard ship. An important objective is to automate the creation of standard metadata records for a myriad of shipboard sensors with a minimum of human intervention. Other key technical investigations include the transformation of shipboard sensor data collections to open standards formats to enable near-real time data access and automated archival, as well as investigation into the use of a shore-side Data Assembly Center to provide a common framework for data transformation and distribution. The team´s approach to systems development, emphasizing collaboration, flexibility, adaptation, a- nd transparency, remains on course to meet future expedition information management needs. The IPT ensures that the information resulting from OER´s global, interdisciplinary expeditions is broadly accessible to decision makers, scientists, educators, and the public, and is preserved for perpetuity. OER will not only serve NOAA´s present needs, it will undoubtedly bring to light what will become of NOAA´s and the Nation´s future missions and priorities.
