Summary form only given. Nanoparticles are larger than individual atoms and molecules but are smaller than the bulk solids. Due to unique phenomenon which occurs in nano particles, their properties can be selectively controlled by engineering the size, morphology and the composition of the particles. These nano materials will have enhanced or entirely different properties compared to their bulk properties. The important objective of the present study is to produce high purity nano powders using pulse power technique. The advantage of the pulse power technique of generation of nano powder, is that the particle size could be controlled by varying the injected power and is an cost effective method of generation of metal nano powders. The literature on the pulsed power technique to generate nano metal particles is scanty and hence it is very essential and important to understand the influence of different parameters on the production of nanoparticles. Having known all, in the present study, the influence of polarity of the charging voltage, charging voltage magnitude, pressure of the operating medium and the length and size of the exploding wire, on the production of the nano particles were analysed. The mechanism of generation of nano particles using pulsed power technique is explained in detail. The microstructural and the thermal properties were analysed through TEM, AFM, WAXD, and TG-DTA studies. Composition analysis were done using energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDAX). Characteristic change in the produced nano particle size was analysed using statistical techniques. The relationship between different control parameters on the particle size were explained in detail. The impacts of binary gas on particle size produced by EEP are discussed. The thermodynamics and kinetics of micro-structural evolution of aluminium nanoparticles are discussed. The particle size distribution of the powders are measured in the present investigation. The characteristics of the nano al- uminium particles are compared with that of its bulk counterpart.
