Effective deployment of Smart Grid technologies requires well-defined and quantified benefits (full-value definition). Depending on the region, country or specific stakeholder, these benefits can be quantified in the areas of technical and business performance, environmental goals, security of electricity supply, and macro-economic growth and business sustainability development. One of the key components to effectively enable full-value realization is technology-the wide range of technical functionalities and capabilities deployed and integrated as one cohesive end-to-end solution supported by a scalability, interoperability and adaptability approach. Many smart grid projects deploy a wide range of smart grid technologies which are driven by regional, country, or utility specific objectives and requirements. These technologies can be broadly captured under the following areas: (1) Low Carbon: e.g. large-scale renewable generation, distributed energy resources (DER), electric vehicles (EV), carbon capture and sequestration (CCS). (2) Grid Performance: e.g. advanced distribution and substation automation (self-healing); wide-area adaptive protection schemes (special protection schemes); wide-area monitoring and control systems (PMU-based situational awareness); asset performance optimization and conditioning (CBM); dynamic rating; advanced power electronics (e.g. FACTS, intelligent inverters, etc.) and many others. (3) Grid Enhanced Applications: e.g. distribution management systems (DMS); energy management systems (EMS); outage management systems (OMS); demand response (DR); advanced applications to enable active voltage and reactive power management (IWC, CWC); advanced analytics to support operational, non-operational and BI decision making; distributed energy resource management; microgrid and Virtual Power Plant (VPP); work force management; geospatial asset management (GIS); KPI dashboards and advanced visualization; and many others. (4) Customer: e.g. Advanced- Metering Infrastructure (AMI); home/building automation (HAN); energy management systems and display portals; EV charging stations; smart appliances and many others. (5) Cyber Security and Data Privacy (6) Communication and Integration Infrastructure Many smart grid technology areas span across the entire electric grid from generation, through transmission and distribution infrastructure all the way down to a wide array of electricity consumers. The objective of this presentation is to discuss deployment of wide-range of advanced technologies and solutions across many smart grid projects globally. In addition, practical lessons- learned from the deployment and operations will be presented.
