A patient-centred approach is increasingly advocated and incorporated in medical education. Due to its multi-dimensionality, however, the concept of patient-centredness appears to be hard to measure and, consequently, to evaluate. The objective of this study was to develop an instrument to measure patient-centredness in line with one central dimension, i.e. physicians’ explorative communication skills: the tendency to encourage (or discourage) patients to express their perspective on illness and treatment, by displaying facilitating and inhibiting behaviours. The paper describes the development of the patient-centred behaviour coding instrument (PBCI), and first results of validity and reliability of the instrument.

The study was conducted in the outpatient division of an academic teaching hospital in The Netherlands, where follow-up encounters were videotaped and coded. Participants were 30 residents and specialists in general internal medicine, rheumatology and gastro-enterology, and 323 patients having a (video-taped) follow-up appointment with one of these physicians. All recorded consultations were coded using the PBCI.

Statistical analyses verified the existence of two dimensions of the PBCI: facilitating and inhibiting behaviours. Interestingly, open and closed questions generally appeared to be indicative of both the facilitating and the inhibiting dimension; only open and closed questions with a psycho-social content were unambiguously classified as facilitating behaviours. Reliability of the facilitating behaviours was high, while reliability of the inhibiting behaviours was moderate. Besides infrequent observations of the inhibiting behaviours, low reliability was partly due to individual inter-rater variability. A global rating of patient-centredness appeared to correlate with the two dimensions in the expected direction: positively with the facilitating and negatively with the inhibiting dimension, indicating the convergent validity of the instrument.
