As patients continue to take a more active role in their health care, an understanding of patient requests of health care providers, including what happens when requests are not fulfilled, is becoming more important. Although its merits have been debated, direct-to-consumer advertising of prescription drugs generates patient requests. The objective of this study was to assess the influence of physician communication style, respondents’ expectations of receiving a requested prescription, and perceived symptom severity on respondents’ evaluations of care following a physician denial of a prescription drug request stimulated by direct-to-consumer advertising. A 2×2×2, between-subjects experimental design was used. The respondents were made up of employees of the University of Mississippi. Physician communication style, respondents’ expectations, and respondents’ perceived symptom severity were manipulated using vignettes. Respondents’ post-visit evaluations of care were assessed by measuring trust in the physician, visit-based satisfaction with the physician, and commitment toward the physician. Factorial analysis of variance procedures for a three-way design were used to test the hypotheses and assess the research questions. Manipulation checks suggested that the independent variables were appropriately manipulated. No significant first-order or second-order interactions were noted in any of the analyses. Post-visit evaluations of care were significantly associated with physician communication style (a partnership response led to better evaluations of care). There were no significant effects of either prior expectation of request fulfillment or perceived symptom severity. However, non-significant trends in mean scores suggested a potential role of these variables in the evaluation process following request denial. The manner in which a physician communicates with an individual is an important determinant of the evaluation of care following the denial of a request. The results suggest that health care providers attempting to minimize the effect of request denials on patient evaluations should make an effort to involve the patient in the decision-making process.
