Despite screening for prostate cancer, mortality in the United States remains substantial. In northern New England, we know little about either determinants of stage at diagnosis—an important predictor of survival—or health outcomes for Franco-Americans, the region's largest ethnic minority. The objective of this investigation was to identify predictors of late prostate cancer stage in a rural, predominantly white state with a large Franco-American population. The Maine Cancer Registry provided incident cases from 1995 to 1998. We modeled individual-level variables (age, sex, race, French ethnicity by surname, and payer) and contextual/town-level variables (socioeconomic measures, population density, Franco ancestry proportion, distance to health care, and weather severity) with multiple logistic regression for late stage. We found that age categories 50–64, 65–74, and 75–84 years—but not 40–49 years—(versus 85+) were protective for late stage, as was residence in higher snowfall areas. Diagnosis in the earlier years of the study, particularly for French-surnamed men, and residence in a high-Franco area conferred greater risk for late disease. However, in a two-way interaction, residence in towns with high Franco ancestry proportion protected French-surnamed men (OR=0.09, type 3 p<0.0593). Using an established framework for social network theory we explore the potential reasons for this interaction, including: high social cohesion, a wide range of strong ties of long duration, and frequent contact, which might have facilitated access to resources as well as social support and normative influences toward health care seeking. The absence of an association of cancer stage with socioeconomic variables may stem from the mixed sociodemographic profiles in rural and urban regions of Maine. We feel that further research should therefore refine these and other contextual measures to elucidate effects on preventable morbidity and mortality; expand our knowledge of Franco-American health outcomes and social networks; and evaluate the utility of assigning French ethnicity by surname.
