The author worked past year as Professor &amp; Head of School of Computing, Information and Mathematical Sciences and Director of Japan Pacific ICT Centre at the University of South Pacific. The South Pacific Region has many problems related to environmental and economic issues. The University of the South Pacific (USP) is an ideal platform for provision of development of Human Resources and enhancement of Human Security in the Pacific. Current dynamic Internet developments and continuous demand for the ubiquitous connectivity combined with the next generation of networks contributes towards creation the future cyberspace infrastructures worldwide. Implementation of the cyberspace in the government and corporate infrastructures, contributes towards creation of new paradigm in the decision making processes. Decisions that are currently governed by the human intelligence knowledge and intuition may be influenced by the cyber-data and processes. Future cyberspace will ultimately impact the decision making processes by government, corporate, industrial and academic institutions worldwide. Main objective of ICT Development is to build human-resource for ICT capacity development all across developing countries in the south pacific while &#8220;bridging the digital divide&#8221;. Main Goal was to provide the south pacific region with appropriate resources to take the lead role in driving the Pacific through Human Resource Development Programs. Specific Goal is to focus on developing and strengthening ICT skills applicable at the e-services level. The author discusses the development of new Japan Pacific Information Communications Technologies (ICT) Centre at the University of the South Pacific and ICT for Human Development and Security in the South Pacific Region. The main objective is to accommodate increasing demand for ICT-related education and training in the region and to accelerate research and development activities in the Pacific. The ICT Centre will play a fa- - cilitator role for ICT related education, Training; and Research and Development for the Pacific. In conclusion the author promotes discussion on the role of the role of the ICT in the South Pacific Region. The author opens discussion on ICT´s social and ethical impact in the south pacific region in the context of governance vs. privacy.
