Since 1995, the Fonds d\´Amortissement des Charges d\´&#201;lectrification (FACE) supports operations aiming at using alternative technical solutions to the extensions and the reinforcements of low tension (LT) network, since these solutions are economically profitable. For alternative solutions to the reinforcement, the idea is either to adapt the network to the existing request, but to modify form of the request on network so that the quality of supply of electricity is brought back at the necessary level. The modifications possibly necessary on uses of electricity are always done with an at least equal, and frequently improved quality of service. The first operations of &#8220;micro&#8221; Demand Side Management (DSM), aiming at setting up alternative solutions to LT reinforcements were carried out since 1995. The initiated projects included actions on the network (voltage adapter slipper for example) and among customers. They led to the development of a method of diagnosis of a LT departure. Another type of operations was also carried out, with the objective to differ investments on the distribution network on a territory scale (primary electrification trade union, homogeneous habitat, etc). This approach is called the &#8220;macro&#8221; DSM. The operations which used DSM approach give good results and generated substantial financial economies, because they made it possible to improve the rendered electric service, while avoiding expensive reinforcements of network. These operations are thus doubly gaining, because they make it possible to improve at the same time quality of supply on network and conditions of use of the equipment among customers. All the operations carried out made it possible to develop and validate tools, and to define the conditions under which DSM is a valid alternative solution. The experience feedback indicates thus that today, the installation of a "quasi-industrial" treatment of departures in constraint by D- M is possible. For that, it is advisable to well know the existing adapted solutions and to select the departures for which technical effectiveness and economic profitability of these solutions have great chances to be assured.
