The performance of a primary bidirectional superior cavopulmonary shunt procedure in early infancy is attractive because it minimizes the number of operations needed before a Fontan procedure, avoids ventricular volume overload and its sequelae, and eliminates pulmonary artery distortion. However, concerns over elevated or labile pulmonary vascular resistance have limited its use in the first few months of life. Nine patients aged 1 to 4 months (5 patients, <2 months) have undergone a primary bidirectional superior cavopulmonary shunt procedure between October 1992 and March 1994. Primary diagnoses were tricuspid atresia (n = 4), asplenia syndrome (n = 2), polysplenia syndrome (n = 1), double-outlet right ventricle (n = 1), and double-inlet left ventricle (n = 1). Associated lesions of immediate surgical importance were total anomalous pulmonary veins (n = 2), a restrictive atrial septum (n = 4), bilateral superior venae cavae (n = 5), and patent ductus arteriosus (n = 5). The surgical procedure consisted of unilateral (n = 4) or bilateral (n = 5) bidirectional superior cavopulmonary shunt and the repair of associated lesions. Of significance, in 4 of our first 5 patients a very limited additional source of pulmonary blood flow was provided because of a low arterial oxygen tension immediately after cardiopulmonary bypass. Pleural effusions developed in 2 of these 4 patients. In subsequent patients cardiopulmonary bypass was not used whenever possible or, if it was needed, use of an extra source of pulmonary blood flow was avoided. There were no early deaths. The bidirectional superior cavopulmonary shunt was taken down to a classic Glenn shunt in 1 patient in whom viral pneumonia developed. There were two late deaths at a median follow-up of 11 months (range, 3 to 16 months). The cause of death was extensive pulmonary arteriovenous fistulas in 1 patient and was unknown in the other. The 7 surviving patients are doing well clinically. In conclusion, a primary bidirectional superior cavopulmonary shunt is possible and has a place in the management of a selected group of these very young infants with a single ventricle.
