This paper describes the processes followed in establishing an I4D Study Centre at the Meraka Institute (South Africa). The initiative started as a joint effort between the Meraka Institute (South Africa) and University of Eastern Finland (Finland). It is to be funded by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland and the University of Eastern Finland. The Centre´s main objective is to support Meraka Institute achieve the goal of South Africa having critical mass research capability in selected niche areas. The I4D Study Centre tasks are to increase both the research expertise pool available for Meraka and the partner university, and the joint development of study programs with universities that will prepare students for a researcher career with an ICT4D agenda. The Centre will also link the research abilities of North West University (NWU) and University of Cape Town (UCT) with Meraka´s research agenda. The Centre is to provide the training needed for students to be able to become researchers. For a start three research areas have been identified in the areas of education, health and environment. The training will be implemented through the delivery of courses and supervision of students working towards their research degrees. The EdTech<sup>&#916;</sup> group brings its expertise in supervising students remotely and its knowledge of creating or coordinating the creation of online courses for post-graduate students. The Tumaini (Tanzania) collaboration has served EdTech<sup>&#916;</sup> to acquire the working knowledge of helping to run a university department in Africa and crafting an IT curriculum that is adapted and relevant to Africa. Hence, the EdTech<sup>&#916;</sup> plans to develop the curriculum for the Centre and put in place the processes to be able to adapt it as it grows. The road to educate Master´s and PhD´s within the Centre will first be piloted by carrying out Honours´ studies in conjunction with partner universities. The successful implementation of the project will provide with a working model of Study Centre that can be adapted to other topics and countries.
