This paper debates the necessity of implementing Virtual Reality Technology as a training tool within Lean Manufacturing Environments (LME). The topic for discussion surrounding this area is the need for a user friendly package that utilizes game and advanced Virtual Reality (VR) Technology to encompass the principles of the Lean approach to manufacturing. Fundamental principles adopted by video game developers attempting to immerse the user could provide a key, through allowing for a fully immersive manufacturing simulation software package. The implementation of VR and training software that would not only teach, but also showcase new technology and show its relevance in a manufacturing system. As a result the use of Lean philosophy acts as a conduit in the implementation of the VR software in adaptable modern manufacturing. Literature within Lean Manufacturing and Video Game Development Immersion Methodologies allow for a juxtaposition between the two, through promoting the validity of novel simulation training techniques. Evaluating case studies of Lean Manufacturing applications will ascertain the need for innovative adaptations, by determining whether solutions could be further improved by latest technological advancements. This paper critically appraises gaming technology and its evolution towards sophisticated design solutions. Learning theories adopted through gaming reveal new approaches to motivational drivers in developing necessary skill sets for modern workforces. Studies surrounding objective based instructional learning highlight rarely acknowledged fields in manufacturing simulation testing. Project Sponsor: Nottingham Trent University &amp; PepsiCo The simulation software is to be built using Unity3D with scripting in C# and Java Script which emulates running of a manufacturing cell within a Lean environment. Its purpose is to train and educate personnel through simulating a functioning manufacturing cell. The software displays potential Lean was- es and problems such as bottle necking. It is imperative to the development of modern manufacturing environments that new simulation techniques in educating workforces, creating prototypes and testing are embraced. Currently only the latter two developments are predominantly created in unison. In Lean, this is wasteful in terms of transport and skill if these are not performed in-house. The need for a more user friendly and intuitive simulation experience requires clarity for potential manufacturers in order to adopt this methodology. Not enough varied Lean manufacturing companies embody Lean principles on a computational software level and as a result could potentially leave entire generations without modern manufacturing skill sets. The concept of VR used in modern Manufacturing Simulation Software (MSS) can be utilised to dispel any belief that VR is solely an entertainment medium. Through examination of Lean Principles and Video Game Development immersion strategies this research highlights the little recognized area of an Immersive Manufacturing Training and Design Testing Application. It is clear that Modern manufacturing environments need to become aware of Lean philosophies of adaptability. There is a requirement to inform companies about utilisation of the latest technologies in order to educate workforces in an efficient and Lean manner. The software runs a simulation on a Zspace 3D display screen in a 3D VR format.
