Objective. A prospective angiographic study was undertaken to investigate, with an objective analysis, the global and regional wall response to myocardial revascularization.

Methods. Thirty-one patients (30 men and 1 woman, mean age, 61 years) with a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 0.30 were admitted to our institution between 1992 and 1995 for two- or three-vessel coronary artery disease requiring myocardial revascularization. All patients underwent isolated coronary artery bypass grafting and were studied 3 months later with angiography. Preoperative and postoperative wall motion were analyzed using special software that computed a segmental left ventricular ejection fraction, generating a segmental score. Computerized analysis allowed us to distinguish patients with diffuse hypokinesis and a symmetric contraction pattern from patients with akinesis involving at least two segments and an asymmetric contraction pattern.

Results. There were no operative deaths and no patient required intraaortic balloon counterpulsation. One patient had postoperative enzymatic evidence of myocardial infarction. Postoperative angiography showed a graft patency rate of 84%. Global analysis showed a small but significant rise in the left ventricular ejection fraction (0.25 ± 0.51 to 0.31 ± 0.70, p < 0.001) and a fall in the left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (23.7 ± 10 to 16.5 ± 9 mm Hg, p < 0.01). Mean scores always have been lower after the operation than before it, with the best results obtained for the apex and the worst for the anterobasal segment. The group with a symmetric contraction pattern showed a trend toward a better hemodynamic response than the group with an asymmetric contraction pattern. Regression analysis revealed two important predictors of segmental functional improvement: (1) the absence of an echocardiographic scar, and (2) the presence of a collateral circulation.

Conclusions. Coronary artery bypass grafting produced a small but substantial improvement in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy. The greater benefit occurred in patients with a symmetric contraction pattern. The absence of an echocardiographic scar and the presence of a collateral circulation predicted segmental functional improvement.
