On behalf of the Organizing Committee, I would like to welcome you to the Twelfth Annual Conference on Privacy, Security, and Trust (PST 2014) held at Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada. The objective of the conference is to provide a forum for researchers worldwide to unveil their latest work in privacy, security and trust and to show how this research can be used to enable innovation. Topics covered this year include Privacy for Mobile and Social Applications, Privacy-Preserving Cryptography and Data Analysis, Business security and Security software Evaluation, Web and Mobile Application Security, Malware and Malicious Detection, Encryption and Secret Sharing, Trust Models, and Reputation Systems. This year´s conference received 161 submissions from 46 countries, out of which 47 papers were selected for regular oral presentation, and 7 for short presentations. All submissions went through a careful anonymous review process (3 or more reviews per submission) aided by 89 Technical Program Committee members and 55 external reviewers. This year´s program includes two keynote addresses by Dr. Ann Cavoukian (Information and Privacy Commissioner, Ontario, Canada) and Dr. Rei Safavi-Naini (AITF Strategic Chair in Information Security at the University of Calgary, Canada). I would like to thank everyone who has given his or her time, energy and ideas to assist in organizing this event, including all the members of the organizing committee, the TPC Co-Chairs, TPC members and all the reviewers, and our two distinguished keynote speakers, Dr. Cavoukian and Dr. Safavi-Naini who have agreed to address the conference attendees. In particular, I would like to highlight and acknowledge the tremendous efforts of Dr. Joaquin Garcia-Alfaro (Publicity Co-chair, and Publication Chair) who worked tirelessly on various conference-related tasks. I also wish to thank all of our sponsors who have made this event possible. It is through the collective efforts of these individuals and org- nizations that we are able to bring you a great event!
