Objective
The aim of this prospective study was to assess the intermediate- (6 months) and longer-term (12 months) follow-up of patients with breast fibroadenomas treated by cryoablation in community-based practice settings.
Methods
The FibroAdenoma Cryoablation Treatment (FACT) registry was created to systematically collect procedural and follow-up data for patients with fibroadenomas treated by cryoablation without subsequent excision. This report summarizes the experience from 55 different practice settings across the United States. Baseline and follow-up clinical data at 6 months and 12 months were tabulated for all patients.
Results
Data from 444 treated fibroadenomas were analyzed. The mean tumor diameter was 1.8 cm. Before cryoablation, 75% of fibroadenomas were palpable by the patient. Follow-up at 6- and 12-month intervals revealed palpability of the treated site in 46% and 35%, respectively. When fibroadenomas were grouped by size, for lesions ≤2 cm, residual cryoablation induce changes were visible by ultrasound in 35% of patients at 6 months. The treatment area was palpable in 31% of cases at this time. Visibility by ultrasound was 27%, and palpability was 28% at 12 months follow-up in these patients with smaller fibroadenomas. For lesions >2 cm, residual cryoablation induce changes were visible by ultrasound in 39% of the patients at 6 months. The treatment area was palpable in 78% of the cases at the same time. Visibility by ultrasound was 32%, and palpability was 59% at 12 months follow-up. Patient satisfaction with the procedure was rated as high at 91% and 88% at 6 and 12 months follow-up, respectively.
Conclusions
Before implementing this technique, patients should be apprised of the likely persistence of a palpable mass of the treated site for a prolonged period that will reabsorb over time. Palpability of the treated site persists for a substantially longer period of time for lesions greater than 2 cm in diameter. For patients with a fibroadenoma smaller than 2 cm, complete resolution can be expected in two thirds and three quarters of the patients at 6 and 12 months, respectively. We will continue to follow these patients to better define the length of time and factors influencing the resolution of the treatment induced physical and radiographic findings.

