Pakistan is developing country with a lot of socio economic issues and one of such issue is obsolete and old land record management system. In Pakistan land management system is almost obsolete, because land administration system of Pakistan has been inherited colonial period of British Rule in the sub-continent which lasted till the middle of 20th century. This system was designed to maintain, transfer and access land revenue and other levies from the land holders. But unfortunately this system was not updated with the passage of time. Now there are approximately 190 million land records in Pakistan which contain the data of nearly 50 million landowners. But now this system demands for change that can meet present needs and would be able to fulfill the future needs. So, keeping in view this problem this research was conducted. The main objective of this research is to transfer the existing attributes of Pakistan cadastral record into ArcGIS Parcel Data Model by accepting the concern attributes and modifying existing record. Arc GIS Parcel Data Model has been developed for USA, but it has the capacity to be molded according to the Pakistan´s environment. The ArcGIS Parcel Model is a starting point for parcel information management and implementing custom made Land Information System (LIS). A general model for parcel data modeling to prepare parcel geodatabase. Parcel Data Model is based on Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC)´s Cadastral Content Standards (USA) intended to support data producer´s environment. First of all attributes of ArcGIS Parcel Data Model were studied, compared with existing Pakistan´s land record and then transformed according to the requirements this system. After transformation a new land record management model for Pakistan was proposed. It was analyzed that ArcGIS Parcel Data Model has this flexibility that it can be transformed into Pakistan´s land record management system. The revised model for Pakistan can adjust a lot of info- mation from existing cadastre record which was not possible earlier. This parcel data model has almost all functions and attributes which a land record should have in itself. It can provide a strong foundation for future land record management of Pakistan and can provide replacement of existing 500 years old cadastre system.
