Objective
The objective of this study was to identify risk factors for recurrent or complicated diverticulitis requiring colectomy.
Methods

A total of 112 patients were admitted to the West Haven Veterans Affairs Medical Center with the diagnosis of colonic diverticular disease from January 1998 to December 2006. Patients' records were assessed for demographics, past medical history, and physical and biochemical features of presentation. Student t tests, analysis of variance, and chi-square analysis were used to compare binary and categoric data.
Results

The medical records of 112 patients admitted to the West Haven Veterans Affairs hospital with the diagnosis of diverticulitis were analyzed retrospectively. A total of 97.3% were male (n = 109), with a mean age of 63.3 years, and a significant smoking history greater than 30 pack-years was present in 70.5% (n = 79) of patients. Eighty-four percent (n = 94) of patients presented with localized abdominal pain and 69.6% (n = 78) had abdominal tenderness without peritoneal signs. Computed tomography was performed in 85.7% (n = 96) of cases. A total of 23.2% (n = 26) of patients proceeded to laparotomy, with free perforation being the most common indication (38.4%, n = 12) followed by a history of 2 or more antecedent attacks of diverticulitis (23.1%, n = 6). Analysis of variance showed that serum albumin levels were significantly lower in the group undergoing colectomy compared with those who did not (3.4 vs 4.1 mg/dL; P = .016). The need for colectomy owing to complicated or recurrent attacks correlated with glucocorticoid use (P < .001) and a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (P < .038), but not with diabetes mellitus, collagen vascular disease, or inflammatory bowel disease.
Conclusions

The rules regarding the treatment of diverticulitis are evolving. Comorbid conditions such as hypoalbuminemia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and glucocorticoid use may predispose patients to recurrent or complicated attacks of diverticulitis requiring colectomy. Stratification and reduction of risks may reduce the overall morbidity and mortality of diverticulitis.
