Objective
Although surgical biliary bypass for nonresectable periampullary tumors is superior to endoscopic stent placement, the latter has become popular because of the “minimally invasive” approach. Laparoscopic biliary bypass would appear to offer the advantages of both. However, this technique remains technically difficult using existing instrumentation. This study investigates the efficacy of a new endoscopic device designed for rapidly completing a small-diameter intestinal anastomosis under laparoscopic guidance.
Methods
Eighteen female pigs (mean weight 35 kg, range 31 to 44) were randomly divided into three groups: animals undergoing handsewn (group H) or instrumental transient endoluminally stented anastomosis (TESA; groups P and D) laparoscopic Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy. For TESA two different reabsorbable stents were used, polyglycolic acid (PGA; group P) and polyurethane ester (Degrapol; group D). Blood chemistry, weight gain, and abdominal X-rays were taken weekly to document any possible migration or reabsorption of the radio-opaque stents. After 3 months, necropsy was performed. Patency of the biliary bypass and choledochojejunostomy were examined using fluoroscopy and measured by introducing graduated dilators into the anastomosis.
Results
Fluoroscopy revealed immediate passage of contrast through the anastomosis in all animals. Weight gain, bilirubin, and alkaline phosphatase were within normal range in all groups. Diameter of the bile duct (group H 10.7 ± 2.9 mm/ group P 9.5 ± 3.6 mm/group D 11.0 ± 4.6 mm) and choledochojejunostomy (group H 4.5 ±1.1 mm/group P 4.7 ±1.8 mm/group D 3.6 ±1.9 mm) did not differ. The time required to complete the biliary bypass was significantly decreased when TESA was applied (group H 152 ± 13 min/group P 86 ± 14 min, P<0.001/group D 110 ± 20 min, P<0.002).
Conclusions
Applying TESA, laparoscopic choledochojejunostomy can be performed rapidly and safely, revealing good bypass function over a period of 3 months. With regard to treatment for nonresectable periampullary tumors, TESA may offer a new therapeutic approach combining the benefits of minimally invasive endoscopic stent placement with the functional results and lower readmission of conventional Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy.

