
Background: The tension-free inguinal hernioplasty is now a popular method because of less postoperative disability and low recurrence rate. The laboratory evaluation of the inflammatory response to the injury is an objective approach to determine the stress status of a surgical procedure. The aim of this study is to evaluate and to compare inflammatory responses to open tension-free and conventional repairs of inguinal hernias.
Methods: Forty-eight male patients with primary indirect inguinal hernias were treated with elective operations, and separated into three groups according to surgical procedure: 12 pediatric patients treated with dissection of hernia sac in group 1, 16 adult patients with open tension-free hernioplasty in group 2, and 20 adult patients with conventional repairs in group 3. Ten healthy adult volunteers formed group 4 as control. The repair was performed with polypropylene mesh and suture as the Lichtenstein technique in group 2, and with polypropylene suture as one of Bassini, McVay, or Shouldice techniques in group 3. The inflammatory response was evaluated with serum interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels at 12 hours and serum C-reactive protein (CRP) levels at 48 hours postoperatively. Serum levels of IL-6 and CRP were measured in group 4 as control. Patient characteristics, operating time, and IL-6 and CRP levels were compared among the four groups.
Results: There were no significant differences in mean age and operating time between the two groups of adult patients with hernia repair. Mean serum IL-6 levels of 12.1 ± 5.2 and 8.2 ± 2.7 pg/mL, and CRP levels of 34.3 ± 13.8 and 7.5 ± 4 mg/L in pediatric and control groups, respectively, were significantly lower than in the other two hernia groups. Mean serum IL-6 levels were 58.9 ± 25.4 pg/mL in group 2 (tension-free repair) and 44.3 ± 18.1 pg/mL in group 3 (conventional repair) (P>0.05). Mean serum CRP levels were 111.3 ± 41.3 and 83 ± 43.2 mg/L in groups 2 and 3, respectively (P>0.05). The differences not being statistically significant, a similar and considerable inflammatory response was noted in patients with either prosthetic mesh repair or with conventional repairs of indirect inguinal hernias.
Conclusions: The reinforcement of the posterior wall of the inguinal canal induces significant cytokine response regardless of tension-free or conventional repair. Open tension-free hernioplasty offered no advantages over conventional repairs from the standpoint of the inflammatory and acute phase response.

