Background: Among directors of general surgery residencies, there is a concern that the quality of medical students applying to surgical residencies is declining.

Methods: Quality of surgical applicants was assessed by several methods including subjective opinions determined by survey and by objective data including student United States Medical Licensing Examination (USMLE) scores of matched candidates. The number of applicants interviewed, total interviews granted, proportion of Alpha Omega Alpha (AOA) students, and the rank order of the candidates matched was obtained by survey. The survey included data on postgraduate year 1 (PGY-1) residents from July 1996 to July 1999. Three mailings were made to 226 US surgical residency programs.

Results: Data were obtained from 90 programs. Surgery program directors disagreed with a survey statement that overall quality of applicants had declined (P <0.01), but agreed with a statement that activities of medical schools to enroll graduating students into primary care had hurt recruitment (P <0.001). Objective data revealed no change in mean USMLE part I scores of PGY-1 residents over the 4 years (P = 0.265, POWER = 0.81). There was no change in proportion of matched residents who were AOA over time. The mean score of all new PGY-1 residents, the rank of the first matched resident, the rank of the last ranked resident, and proportion of AOA students was higher in programs with five or more categorical spots when compared with programs of at most four (P <0.001). Across all programs, there was a trend to go lower on the rank list to fill categorical positions over time (P <0.001).

Conclusions: There is a perception that medical school policies act to discourage recruitment of quality medical students into general surgery programs, and surgery programs are going deeper into their rank lists to fill categorical positions. However, the average USMLE part I score of applicants to surgical residencies and proportion of AOA applicants has not decreased.
