Purpoe
To invetigate whether conjunctival inflammation repreent a primary event in the pathogenei of keratoconjunctiviti icca or whether it i a econdary inflammatory reaction caued by enhanced mechanical irritation a a reult of urface dryne and whether anti-inflammatory drop (corticoteroid and nonteroidal anti-inflammatory) have therapeutic effect and are imilar.
Deign
ingle-maked, randomized, propective clinical trial.
Method
Thirty-two keratoconjuctiviti patient with or without jögren yndrome were included in the tudy. The patient were randomized to three group. Group 1 patient received a topical artificial tear ubtitute (AT); group 2 received AT plu nonteroidal anti-inflammatory drop (NAID); and group 3 received AT plu topical corticoteroidal drop. The eye ymptom everity core, chirmer tet value, roe bengal and fluorecein taining core were evaluated before treatment and 15 and 30 day after tart of treatment. Impreion cytology pecimen were tained uing immunohitochemical method to detect the percentage of human leukocyte antigen II (HLA-DR) poitive, Apo 2.7 poitive, and periodic acid–chiff poitive cell. tatitical analye were performed within and between group.
Reult
Group 3 patient had ignificantly lower ymptom everity core, fluorecein and roe bengal taining, and HLA-DR poitive cell on day 15 and 30 compared with patient in other group. They alo had a ignificantly higher number of periodic acid–chiff poitive (goblet) cell in their impreion cytology pecimen on day 15 and 30 compared with the other patient. On day 30, group 3 patient had ignificant difference compared with their baeline meaurement in term of above-mentioned parameter. However, we did not detect a ignificant effect of any treatment chedule on the hirmer tet value and the number of Apo 2.7 cell in impreion cytology pecimen.
Concluion
Topical corticoteroid had a clearly beneficial effect both on the ubjective and objective clinical parameter of moderate-to-evere dry eye patient. Thee effect were aociated with the reduction of inflammation marker of conjunctival epithelial cell.

