Performance evaluation in virtual organizations is one of the most important issues that have been considered due to the transition from industrial age to knowledge era. Virtual organizations, as one of the challenges of third millennium, which came to existence for enhancing organization´s performance through outsourcing, are not excluding. A virtual organization and its smaller variant, the virtual team, is an organizational network that is structured and managed to function as an identifiable and complete organization. Determining what meanings virtual team members attach to performance evaluation system in IT Companies is a vital precursor to understand the effectiveness of the management practice, rendering this study a preliminary investigation. The literature confirms that perceptions of management practices in IT Industries can influence employee loyalty and role-related behaviors. Perceptions of unfairness can be more detrimental for geographically distributed workers in MNCs than for collocated teams. Although businesses continue to drive demands for virtual organizations, most contemporary studies of performance evaluation system are limited to traditional organizational settings. An interpretive, phenomenological domain Driven Data Mining (D3M) approach utilizing 360 Degree data mining for objective measurement and opinion mining for subjective measurement enabled a hermeneutic analysis process. The main objective of this research is to investigate the main factors that affect the performance of employees in virtual organization especially IT Companies and to show how these factors can be used for performance evaluation in virtual organization. Based on the review of literature, this study provides a unified domain Driven Data Mining (d3m) approach for evaluating data intelligence, domain intelligence, human intelligence, network intelligence, social intelligence, and meta synthesis of ubiquitous intelligence for performance appraisal in virtual organi- ations like IT Industries. This study examined opinion mining of virtual team members as subjective measure for their performance evaluation system. A phenomenological approach using support vector machine was used to Meta synthesize as ubiquitous intelligence. This D3M approach gives a valuable insight into the performance of employees in virtual organization and can give a useful help to practitioners to evaluate the performance of employees in virtual organizations.
