Summary form only given. The transfer of ultra-stable frequencies between distant laboratories is a fundamental issue for a wide range of high-sensitivity experiments in advanced metrology and fundamental physics. Since a few years, several experiments of optical frequency transfer were reported over dedicated fiber, with a record distance of 920 km [1] recently demonstrated in Germany. The challenge is now to build a wide frequency dissemination network connecting laboratories and research agencies in Europe.For that purpose we exploit the existing fine meshing of the Internet fiber network, connecting laboratories via the National Research Networks (NRENs). In that scheme, the ultra-stable frequency signal is copropagating simultaneously with the Internet traffic in the same fiber using a dedicated channel in a dense wavelength division multiplexing (DWDM) approach. Optical add-drop multiplexers enable to insert and extract the ultra-stable frequency signal in and from the network.We have demonstrated an ultra-stable optical link over 540 km, including 470 km of public fiber network of the French NREN (RENATER) simultaneously carrying Internet data traffic [2]. The signal bypasses four amplification stages and two Data Center Facilities using multiplexers and custom-made bidirectional erbium-doped fiber amplifiers. One specific point of this experiment is that with Internet fibers, we have a very limited control on the attenuation and noise. For instance the Erbium fiber doped bidirectional amplifiers gain is drastically limited to avoid lasing oscillations due to parasitic reflections due to connectors, splices and more fundamental Rayleigh backscattering. Nevertheless the results are comparable with those obtained with dedicated fibers. Figure 1 shows the measured fractional frequency stability, we obtain 6&#215;10-15 at 1 s and below 10-18 after 10000 second integration time. Such optical link will enable a broad range of high-sensitivity measurements, incl- ding the search for fundamental constants variation and gravitational mapping. This concept of fiber link has been very recently used to implement a giant fiber gyroscope [3]
