Background: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration have designated five categories of workplaces as carrying higher than normal risk for exposure to tuberculosis (TB): “health care facilities” is one of these categories. To assist all health care facilities in developing an appropriate and effective control plan, the CDC has listed various components to be included in the overall plan—however, the components needed cannot be determined until the level of risk has been determined. The published criteria for risk assessment are more appropriately applicable to a hospital-based facility. In complying with CDC's guidelines and adopting the recommended components of the TB control program at a large, educational, ambulatory care dental facility, several obstacles were identified.
Methods: As part of the risk assessment for TB transmission and to determine the significance of purified protein derivative of tuberculin (PPD) skin-test conversions observed among the student and employee populations, we implemented a strategy that consisted of surveying all accredited dental schools in the country, performing a controlled PPD screening study involving predoctoral dental students in their junior year, and reviewing and evaluating all patient registration records for the same period.
Results: Forty-four percent of the dental schools contacted agreed to participate in the survey. Of these, 58% had no information available on student PPD conversion rates and 29% either had no data available yet or were unwilling to share their information. Three schools (12%) that had some data and were willing to share it reported PPD conversion rates for faculty, students, or staff of 1% to 2%. The student PPD study showed a 10.7% conversion rate, but the registration record reviews showed no convincing evidence of patients with active TB having been registered at the dental school for the period of the student PPD study.
Conclusion: Development of a TB control program relies heavily on assessment of risk within a health care facility. The sporadic reports of PPD conversion rates among dental care workers are not adequate to determine the magnitude of exposure to TB in educational dental settings. Further studies are necessary to establish the true risk and to assist dental care facilities in developing TB control programs.

