Background: To ensure quality patient care and enhance career development, competency levels of infection control professionals (ICPs) need to be identified and strengthened so that high standards of practice are established and maintained. Objective: The purpose of this study was to apply a modified version of Benner's (1984) “Novice to Expert” model of skill acquisition to levels of competency and to seek to measure practices of the specialist practitioner in the context of infection control. Method: A self-administered questionnaire was developed and mailed to 464 members of the Infection Control Association, New South Wales (NSW) Inc, Australia. Results: Seventeen percent of respondents reported full-time infection control responsibilities, 78% part time, and 5% unknown. The sample comprised 4 groups of ICPs. The largest groups were registered nurses, representing 37% of total respondents and “Other health care professionals” representing 35%. Forty-nine percent of the sample had completed a basic or advanced infection control certificate course, 21% had completed a bachelor of nursing or health science degree, and 21% had completed other studies not related to the specialty. Key findings of this study indicated that the clinical nurse consultant group rated their individual levels of skills and knowledge as proficient (competent). Although a small percentage from this group had completed higher level education, years of service within the specialty contributed to an increase in competent performance. This was also applicable to the other groups studied. Conclusion: The findings highlighted the need for a framework to be developed on which to build a model to measure and reflect progression of infection control competence at the beginner, advanced beginner, competent, and expert levels. Continuing education as a means of achieving competence needs to be further developed, maintained, and nurtured so that the ICP can acquire appropriate specialty knowledge and skills. (AJIC Am J Infect Control 2000;28:228-32)
