BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Visitation of hospitalized humans by dogs and other companion animals is becoming commonplace. While the therapeutic value of such practices has been investigated, the potential health hazards, both to patients and dogs, have not. This study evaluated the prevalence of carriage of zoonotic pathogens by dogs that visit human hospitals.

METHODS: A sample of 102 healthy dogs was recruited from a variety of visitation programs across Ontario. A standardized questionnaire was administered to each dog's owner to obtain dog and program information. Fecal samples, aural, nasal, oral, pharyngeal and rectal swabs, and hair-coat brushings were collected from all dogs and selectively tested for pathogens.

RESULTS: Salmonella spp was isolated from 6 fecal samples, extended-spectrum beta lactamase (ESBL) and/or cephalosporinase E. coli from 6, and Clostridium difficile from 58. Pasteurella multocida and P. canis were isolated from 29 oral swabs. Fecal flotation found 2 dogs to be shedding Toxocara canis and 1 other to be shedding Ancylostoma caninum. Enzyme immunoassays detected Giardia spp antigen in 7 fecal samples, but failed to detect any Cryptosporidium spp. With C. difficile excluded, no one dog was found to carry more than 1 enteric pathogen. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus was not isolated from any nasal or pharyngeal swabs or from feces. Similarly, neither Pseudomonas aeruginosa nor group A Streptococci nor Microsporum canis were isolated from any aural, pharyngeal, or hair samples, respectively. Only spay/neutering was identified as a statistically significant protective factor against shedding Salmonella (odds ratio 0.10, 95% confidence interval 0.29-0.69, p = 0.001). None of the other factors, such as antimicrobial history, diet, or degree of interaction with patients or other dogs, were significantly associated with any organism.

CONCLUSIONS: The significance of these findings, particularly the high prevalence of C. difficile, warrants cautious consideration. At this point, all that can be said with certainty is that dogs can carry many organisms of potentially pathogenic consequence without displaying clinical signs. The origin (hospital versus community) of these pathogens and whether they pose a risk to patients requires further study. Veterinarians and physicians should work together to better evaluate the risks of these potential pathogens and develop objective criteria for screening of hospital visitation dogs.
