ISSUE: There is a great need for continual education and reinforcement of infection control (IC) practices that is rapid and easily accessible. This is particularly true in large medical centers where the number and turnover of house staff and employees is substantial. These issues contributed to the need for an easy, point-of-care reference card for isolation categories and IC policies. Enhanced collaboration between the healthcare providers and the IC team is also needed.

PROJECT: Pocket-sized reference cards focused on IC topics were developed. Two versions were created, the first one aimed at physicians and the second at other frontline healthcare professionals, particularly nursing staff. Both versions of the card contain descriptions of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) isolation categories including organism-specific guidelines, the manner in which isolation may be discontinued, certain protocols, important reminders, and IC contact information. The physician card contained additional detailed information regarding Tuberculosis isolation. The cards were distributed at staff orientation, during formal educational lectures, and at the point of care by the IC team. The intent of the cards was to aid the healthcare provider in making accurate and timely decisions regarding IC at the point of care.

RESULTS: To date, 600 physician and 1200 heathcare professional cards have been distributed throughout the medical center. The cards have been strongly accepted by the medical and nursing staff. Several patient care units requested additional cards and had them laminated for the staff. Subjectively, there has been a decrease in the number of calls to IC regarding basic isolation procedures. IC staff is beginning to be seen as an important part of the patient care team. This is imperative as governmental and patient safety organizations are looking for evidence that IC is an active member of the healthcare team.

LESSONS LEARNED: The card's acceptance and ease of use demonstrates the need for more quick reference and educational material that focuses on IC policies and practices. The success of this basic intervention suggests that other modes of information delivery, such as use of personal data assistant (PDA) devices and an IC Website, may also be useful tools for dissemination of IC-related information.
