ISSUE: Reinforcing the linkages between infection control and occupational health strengthens both programs and enhances patient and employee safety.

PROJECT: This is a 160-bed center specializing in the care of patients with musculoskeletal diseases. The hospital employs approximately 2000 professional and ancillary staff. In 2000, the occupational health services (OHS) nurse manager left to assume a different position within the facility. After much discussion, a decision was made to link the infection control and occupational health services under one leader. The person selected had previous experience in both occupational health and infection control. It was agreed by the vice president for nursing that the manager for the newly combined departments would not provide clinical services for occupational health, but would serve in an administrative capacity only.

RESULTS: The linking of the two departments has been a remarkable success. Nursing staff in both areas has been cross trained in activities such as surveillance, education, immunizations, reportable communicable diseases, and bloodborne pathogen exposure response. The office staffs have been cross trained for computer support. Employees from both departments welcomed the opportunity for additional education and professional development. Each department has maintained its own distinct personality and responsibility but supports the other, leading to greater productivity for both. Hospital employees are sharing information about occupational health issues such as problems with sharps devices with the IC/OHS team who are visible and approachable within the hospital. These problems can then be observed and acted upon in real time. Important events such as tuberculosis skin testing, influenza vaccination programs, and annual education day have become successful team events. The number of influenza vaccines administered has increased by more than 100% in 4 years; Tuberculosis skin testing has increased by 58%, and annual health assessment compliance has increased by 40%.

LESSONS LEARNED: This program can reap tremendous benefits for patients and staff if both departments and the manager are committed to success, and the linkage is fully supported by administration. Resources spent to educate and develop the staff have been repaid by patient and employee satisfaction statements and increased compliance with immunization and competency efforts.
