Utilizing adult learning methods to build a team approach to infection control orientation in a community hospital  
Page e146
C. Meyer
Close Close preview  |   Purchase PDF (51 K)   |   Related articles  |  Related reference work articles
AbstractAbstract
ISSUE: Surveillance, prevention, and control of infection in a healthcare setting are closely related to the knowledge, skills, and commitment of a diverse staff to implement infection prevention strategies. This information must be conveyed to receptive frontline workers if an organization intends to move forward to a culture of safety for patients and staff. We also recognized a need to develop healthcare teams of committed employees.

PROJECT: An interactive board game, “Infection Control…Worst Case Scenario,” was implemented in 2004. The orientation group divided themselves into teams of healthcare providers. The objective of the game was to get their patient (playing piece) through the hospital without developing a nosocomial infection. Each team chose a playing piece, and by rolling dice and answering infection control questions correctly could help their patient get to discharge. Along the way, they encountered infectious incidents and had to answer another question to overcome the obstacle. Employees were encouraged to use their resources, including the course outline, members of their team, and the infection control practitioner. An OSHA inspector was included on the board and if the patient landed on the square holding the inspector, the team had to answer an infection control challenge question. New employees were tested immediately after orientation to evaluate learning. They were asked key questions during the first year of their employment to evaluate learning, perceptions of being part of a team, and appropriateness of the orientation program.

RESULTS: 1) Teaching sessions became animated. 2) Each team member had access to the assets of the entire team. 3) This format allowed for timely feedback and led to open communication. 4) One hundred percent of responding staff reported in 2004 that education was provided on handwashing, compared to 58% in 2003. 5) Ninety-four percent (94%) of employees reported receiving education on appropriate glove use in 2004, compared to 78% in 2003. 6) Needlesticks went from 15 in 2002, to 25 in 2003, to 6 in 2004.

CONCLUSIONS: Educational interventions encouraged open communication, provided colorful graphics, were nonjudgmental, were fun, reduced boredom, and increased learning. Staff surveillance reports and calls to the infection control practitioner increased as well as staff perceptions of being part of a team (which could not be measured).

