ISSUE: With infection control viewed as boring, uninteresting, and time-consuming, we set out to create an inexpensive but informative tool that would engage and motivate hospital staff to incorporate infection control into their daily activities.

PROJECT: We developed the “Infection Prevention and Control Tip of the Week.” The tips are published with Microsoft Word and utilize multiple font types, font sizes, colors, and pictures. They are sent every Monday to staff via e-mail and are posted for those without e-mail access. The information is concise (limited to 1 page), timely (many topics focus on current events impacting infection control), relevant, of interest to all hospital staff (not just clinical staff), and typically humorous. Each week, the tip focuses on a topic garnered from current news reports, staff ideas, and/or observations on the units by the infection control practitioners (ICPs). Topics have included Tuberculosis, meningitis, respiratory etiquette, and hand hygiene.

RESULTS: Developing a tip each week, which includes determining a topic, researching the topic, finding appropriate images, and creating a visually appealing format, can be time-consuming. However, the overwhelmingly positive response from staff members and acknowledgment that they find the tips informative, easy to read, humorous, relevant, and interesting enough to bring home to their families convinced us that this is a worthwhile project. Since beginning this project, communication and interaction has increased with all staff including doctors, nurses, and support and ancillary staff. Staff members send e-mails, call, or stop ICPs on the units to comment on the tips, ask questions generated by the tips, or provide additional ideas for future tips. Production and distribution is minimal and cost-effective.

LESSONS LEARNED: The Tip of the Week has provided a positive forum for communicating relevant infection control issues to hospital staff. This is a non-threatening method for highlighting incorrect behavior/practices and for communicating “breaking news” or current events as they relate to infection control. Using humor to discuss serious issues increases receptiveness to the information. The Tip of the Week provides a convenient method for quickly disseminating information. This approach has increased staff awareness and most importantly has facilitated communication between staff and ICPs.
