Navigation electronic map, one of the electronic maps or databases which contain spatial position geographical coordinates can be combined with spatial positioning system and guide man or means of transportation accurately to arrive from place of departure to place of destination with spatial information service function of location-based services and internet application. With the ever-increasing expansion of urban size, road construction has witnessed changes with each passing day, thus actual environment requires urban navigation electronic map strengthening geographical coverage and the accuracy of the information points. Urban navigation electronic map must possess very high accuracy, including the precision of geographic position data and accuracy of the actual ground features information. Various elements of urban navigation electronic map should also have correct topological relationships and overall connectivity, which enables each ground feature to correctly map the actual world in logic and in semantic. Urban navigation electronic map must provide complete ground features attribute information to satisfy the objective and actual requirements of searching and retrieval and navigation applications. Provincial foundation surveying and mapping is a basic and early phase project the provincial government has established with investment and with established updating mechanism. Provincial foundation surveying and mapping 3D products refer to the 1:10000 scale digital mapping products DLG, DEM, DOM. Digital line graphic (DLG) is the dataset vector of tiered storage of basic geographical elements of existing topographic maps, not only includes spatial information but also includes attribute information. Digital elevation model (DEM) is the digital collection which express ground surface relief by elevation. Digital orthoimage map (DOM) is the orthoimage data which applies digital elevation models to correct and inlay digital images, according to map sheet, clippin- - g and generating. Provincial foundation surveying and mapping DLG adopts ArcGIS Shapefile data format, with similar scale and data format to 1:10000 scale urban navigation electronic map, which can provide vector data for navigation electronic map production to ensure the consistency of the size, layer, classification and coding, properties of the map symbol. DEM, DOM can provide data base for three-dimensional navigation digital map production. High precision, high reliability, total factors of information and updating mode of provincial foundation surveying and mapping products just meet the requirement of the accuracy, information-richness and feasibility for urban navigation electronic map. Provincial foundation surveying and mapping 3D products, being used in urban navigation electronic map production, is a direct, economical, and efficient service mode. This paper describes the control and surveying of photograph, photograph annotation, and DLG, DEM, DOM data production process of provincial foundation surveying and mapping. Road annotation, production process, topology relation and geometric expression, coordinate transformation and data format of 1:10000 scale urban navigation electronic map are also dwelt on in the paper.
