BACKGROUND: Monitoring construction projects is an integral part of hospital IC programs. Regulatory agencies mandate that IC policies adhere to environment of care standards. This university medical center is an 800-bed hospital with 45 affiliated clinics. Recently, the IC program has devoted considerable resources to monitoring construction activities in the hospital and clinics.

OBJECTIVE: To quantify IC time and labor costs expended in monitoring construction activities in our medical center.

METHODS: Infection control practitioners (ICPs) recorded the number of 1) construction projects and 2) hours devoted to monitoring those sites during 2003-2004. To calculate IC construction labor costs for 2004, we multiplied the number of IC hours devoted to construction activities by an average ICP hourly wage of $30.63. We also recorded the number of times that projects were altered due to IC input and the number that deviated from IC recommendations on follow-up visits.

RESULTS: During 2004, which was a typical year for construction, there were a total of 22 new construction projects and 45 incidental renovations (e.g., water leaks and mold remediation) at the medical center. The estimated cost of these construction projects was $76,971,266. ICPs attended a total of 56 planning meetings and made a total of 144 site visits. In total, ICPs devoted an estimated 427 hours related to monitoring construction renovations in 2004 (estimated cost = $13,079.01). Due to IC input, 54 construction plans were altered. Of the 67 construction projects, a total of 67 deviated from original IC recommendations.

CONCLUSION: Monitoring construction is fundamental to the duties of IC and to the goal of maintaining a safe environment for patients, staff, and visitors. Monitoring construction involves planning, meetings, infection prevention strategies, and rounding in involved areas. Twenty-five percent (25%) of ICPs' time is spent on construction during any standard period of time. In addition, incidental events place additional time demands upon the ICP. Responsibilities related to construction required significant IC resources at this medical center in 2004.
