ISSUE: In spite of ongoing heightened awareness, tuberculosis continues to be a challenging infection control problem. This paper summarizes a recent experience on the exposure and control of tuberculosis in a high risk unit. In September 2005, a patient was admitted through the ER to a negative pressure medical ICU. Chest X-ray showed a cavitary lesion and sputum was AFB positive, subsequently confirmed as Mycobacterium tuberculosis. One month earlier, this patient was admitted to a semi-private room on the oncology unit for 10 days due to subclavian thrombosis. During the August admission, a chest X-ray report of a “suspicious cavitary lesion” was not communicated by the referring care center.

PROJECT: Patients within the area of the index patient, hospital staff who cared for the index patient during the August admission and everyone in adjacent units during this time period were identified. A total of 133 inpatients and 252 hospital staff were offered tuberculin skin testing (TST) at baseline and 8-14 weeks post exposure, and chest X-ray. Baseline chest X-rays taken during the August admission were compared to follow-up studies. At baseline, employee TST was repeated if last performed more than three months prior to the exposure and at three months post exposure.

RESULTS: Two patients were TST screen positive, chest X-ray negative and asymptomatic. These patients were on the cardiology floor below oncology, with shared air circulation and considered to be in a “lower risk” area. Isoniazid was offered to these patients but was declined by their primary care physicians. One hospital staff member converted to positive at TST screen from the last annual test and was placed on Isoniazid. All three TST reactors had risk factors inclusive and exclusive of this exposure. Sixty patients completed screening. However, 73 patients did not complete screening due to death/palliative care (24), declined (31) or were lost to follow-up (18). The Infection Control team and administration met with the admitting physician to discuss further preventive strategies.

LESSONS LEARNED: Effective preventive strategies are needed including ongoing education of the hospital staff in high risk areas for admission assessment of possible TB. Ongoing communication in the continuum of care among health care personnel working in high risk areas, primary care physicians, Infection Control and Employee Health Services is critical to preventing accidental exposure to TB.
