Geographical Information Sciences (GIS) in China have made great progress in recent years, and the Geographical Information Industry also developed well. But the public are still lack of knowledge about GIS, and they don´t know exactly how GIS could facilitate their life and work. So there still is a long road for the socialization and popularization of GIS. Firstly this paper analyzed the status quo of GIS industry these years, pointed out the constraints and shortage for GIS´ socialization and popularization. Based on the experience learning theory and circumstances learning of constructivism, this paper proposes the general framework of constructing GIS scientific experience area. The objective of constructing GIS scientific experience area is to provide the public necessary knowledge about GIS and promote socialization and popularization by supplying GIS experience to public. It tries to boost sciential discovery by experiencing and make the users to obtain some GIS spatial analysis knowledge, enhance the users´ practical ability, and forming thinking pattern of GIS spatial analysis. Take the application of site decision as an example; this paper developed a series of case from the easy to difficult levels, focusing on the GIS learning experience, application and site decision. These applications vividly show the principles and methods of GIS spatial analysis. These case experiences included a digital interactive platform for the teenagers using GIS techniques such as RIA (Rich Internet Application) and open-source WebGIS and so on. From the effects of it works, GIS scientific experience area could provide the users plentiful GIS experience, which would be helpful to promote GIS knowledge for public, especially for teenagers, and promote GIS socialization of application for further development. Finally, this paper discusses the limitations in the GIS learning experience area, and put forward several suggestions to improve and develop the GIS learning experien- - ce zone.
