Issue
In the 21st century, one of the most challenging tasks for the infection control practitioner (ICP) is establishing collegiality and trust with contractors, architects, maintenance and engineering personnel. We describe how an urban teaching hospital's infection control program cooperated with contractors during a large demolition, construction, and renovation project in order to protect its large population of immunosuppressed patients.
Project

Most contractors are not accustomed to taking special precautions during demolition. Because of a previous Aspergillus outbreak in our heart transplant population, we already had an established infection control (IC) training program for contractors. We expanded and codified it in response to a major hospital renovation. The IC, in-house Design and Construction, and outside contractors meet before the initiation of all major renovation projects to anticipate IC concerns and proactively plan for infection control interventions. Now, all contractors and maintenance staff are required to receive IC training at the time of their employment. A hospital identification badge with attached sticker that indicates the IC training date is required. Infection Control Risk Assessments (ICRA) are initiated by project managers and completed jointly with IC. The ICPs make rounds on all projects at least weekly and large projects are visited daily. We established a team comprised of ICP, project manager, construction manager, and area nurse manager to monitor and make recommendations for improvement continually during the project. Staff are educated about construction so they can help monitor airflow and cleanliness.
Results

Our contractors are more compliant with our IC specifications since they now understand why we insist on them. Through the years of major construction, the workers have jumped on the bandwagon. It is not unusual for construction or maintenance staff to contact IC for advice. There were four years of extensive construction without any hospital acquired Aspergillus infections. In the 5th year, after a neighboring institution started demolition and new construction, we identified two possible nosocomial infections and took immediate steps to make more corrections. There have been no further infections.
Lessons Learned

The IC compliance is based on trust, education, and on-going monitoring. Proactive education and collaboration lead to long-term relationships, trust and patient safety.
Objective

This article describes how a large teaching hospital's infection prevention program achieved compliance from contractors during a large renovation.
