There are several techniques for image recognition. Among those methods, application of soft computing models on digital image has been considered to be an approach for a better result. The main objective of the present work is to provide a new approach for image recognition using Artificial Neural Networks. Initially an original gray scale intensity image has been taken for transformation. The Input image has been added with Salt and Peeper noise. Adaptive median Filter has been applied on noisy image such that the noise can be removed and the output image would be considered as filtered Image. The estimated Error and average error of the values stored in filtered image matrix have been calculated with reference to the values stored in original data matrix for the purpose of checking of proper noise removal. Now each pixel data has been converted into binary number (8 bit) from decimal values. A set of four pixels has been taken together to form a new binary number with 32 bits and it has been converted into a decimal. This process continues to produce new data matrix with new different set of values. This data matrix has been taken as original data matrix and saved in data bank. Now for recognition, a new test image has been taken and the same steps as salt &amp; pepper noise insertion, removal of noise using adaptive median filter as mentioned earlier have been applied to get a new test matrix. Now the average error of the second image with respect to original image has been calculated based on the both generated matrices. If the average error is more than 45% then a conclusion can be made that the images are different and cannot be matched. But if the value of average error has been found to be less than or equal to 45%, an effort has been made to use the artificial neural network on test data matrix with reference to original data matrix thereby producing a new matrix of the second image(test image). The total average error has been calculated on generated da- a matrix produced after the application of artificial neural networks on test data matrix to check whether proper identification can be made or not. It has been observed that the value of average error is less than that of test image without application of artificial neural network. Further it has been observed that the test image is matching and recognized with respect to original image.
