Youth Tobacco Sales in a Metropolitan County: Factors Associated With Compliance  Original Research Article
Pages 91-97
Dave C. Pearson, Lin Song, Roger B. Valdez, Antoinette S. Angulo
Close Close preview  |   Purchase PDF (75 K)   |   Related articles  |  Related reference work articles
AbstractAbstract | Figures/TablesFigures/Tables | ReferencesReferences
Objective
To describe and identify factors associated with tobacco sales in a metropolitan county.
Setting

King County, Washington is the largest county in Washington State with an estimated population of 1.8 million or about 30% of the state’s population.
Data Source

The data analysis is based on compliance checks in King County between January 2001 and March 2005. The 8879 checks were conducted by 91 youth operatives aged 14–17. Analysis of data was completed in 2006.
Statistical Analysis

The outcome variable for this analysis was whether “a sale was made” to a youth operative during a compliance check. Associations between independent variables and the outcome variable were examined using 2 × 2 tables, univariate (unadjusted) logistic regression, and multivariate (adjusted) logistic regression analysis.
Results

Overall tobacco sales during the 4-year and 3-month period was 7.7%. Convenience stores selling gas were significantly more likely to sell tobacco products to minors, whereas restaurants, bars, and tobacco discount stores were less likely to sell to minors. Other factors that were significantly associated with sales are described.
Conclusions

In a county that has adopted many of the required youth access laws, opportunities still exist to reduce sales of tobacco products to minors. Asking for age and photo identification still appears to be an effective strategy in reducing sales of tobacco products to minors.
Article Outline

Introduction

King County, Washington
Current Compliance Check Practices in King County

Methods

Data Source
Statistical Analysis

Results

Type of Store
Previous Check Sales During the Study Period
Day of the Week
Age of Youth Operative
Minor and Clerk Gender
Clerk Age
Requesting Identification and Age
Tobacco Location in the Store
King County Region
Time of Check
Yellow Sign Posted
Neighborhood Poverty Level

Discussion
Conclusion
Acknowledgements
References


