OBJECTIVE: Our purpose was to investigate the temporal relationship between Δ4-androstenedione-induced preterm switching of myometrial activity patterns from contractures to contractions and maternal plasma estradiol and oxytocin concentrations in the 0.8 gestation rhesus monkey. STUDY DESIGN: Eight rhesus monkeys (132 to 136 days' gestation) were instrumented under halothane with femoral artery and vein catheters and uterine electromyogram electrodes. At 138 to 142 days' gestation baseline maternal femoral artery blood samples for estradiol and oxytocin measurement were taken at 30-minute intervals for 7 hours, starting 2 hours before the onset of darkness. The day after baseline sampling a continuous intravenous Δ4-androstenedione infusion (0.3 mg • kg-1 • hr-1 in 10% intralipid at 0.25 ml • hr-1) was started in four monkeys, while four monkeys were infused intravenously with intralipid alone. The sampling regimen was then repeated at 1 and 3 days after the start of the Δ4-androstenedione or intralipid infusion. Contractions were counted and estradiol and oxytocin were measured by radioimmunoassay. RESULTS: Androstenedione promoted a premature nocturnal increase in myometrial contractions in conjunction with an increase in maternal plasma concentrations of estradiol and oxytocin, which were of similar magnitude to those measured in spontaneous term labor. The increase in maternal estradiol preceded the increase in maternal oxytocin levels and myometrial contractions. The onset of the increase in maternal plasma oxytocin was closely associated with the appearance of myometrial contractions after Δ4-androstenedione treatment. In contrast, no sustained premature contractions or changes in estradiol and oxytocin occurred in intralipid-treated monkeys. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that in the 0.8 gestation rhesus monkey (1) the increase in maternal plasma estradiol precedes the increase in maternal plasma oxytocin after Δ4-androstenedione treatment and (2) Δ4-androstenedione-induced preterm myometrial contractions are closely associated in time with physiologic increases in maternal plasma oxytocin concentrations. (AM J OBSTET GYNECOL 1996;174:1050-5.)
