OBJECTIVE: Our purpose was to describe the temporal and quantitative relationships among intrauterine infection, fetal-placental steroid biosynthesis, and preterm labor in a nonhuman primate model. STUDY DESIGN: On approximately day 130 of gestation (term 167 days) chronically instrumented rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) were infected with 106 colony-forming units of group B streptococci either by intraamniotic (n = 4) or choriodecidual (n = 2) inoculation. As controls, four additional chronically instrumented noninfected monkeys were followed up to spontaneous parturition. Amniotic fluid and maternal and fetal arterial blood were serially sampled in all monkeys (both before and after infection) for progesterone, estrone, estradiol, dehydroepiandrosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, androstenedione, and cortisol by specific radioimmunoassays, and uterine activity was continuously recorded. RESULTS: Spontaneous parturition was preceded by gradual and significant increases in the plasma concentrations of fetal dehydroepiandrosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, and androstenedione and fetal and maternal levels of estrone, estradiol, and progesterone but not by changes in cortisol. In contrast, infection-associated parturition (either intraamniotic or choriodecidual) was characterized by abrupt increases in fetal dehydroepiandrosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, androstenedione, progesterone, and cortisol but not by increases in maternal or fetal estrone or estradiol. Infection-associated steroid changes occurred concurrently with or after increases in uterine activity. CONCLUSION: Infection-associated preterm parturition is associated with dramatic increases in fetal adrenal steroid biosynthesis but not by corresponding increases in placental estrogen biosynthesis. This suggests that fetal stress is accompanied by placental dysfunction and that infection-associated parturition is not dependent on the increased estrogen biosynthesis observed in spontaneous parturition. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:1725-33.)
