OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to establish virologic or molecular criteria for evaluating the rate of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 and for defining the role of virus burden in the development of gynecologic diseases in human immunodeficiency virus - infected women. STUDY DESIGN: Paired samples of blood and cervicovaginal secretions from 63 human immunodeficiency virus - seropositive women were evaluated for cell-free and cell-associated virus load by several methods, including quantitative cultures and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. RESULTS: All women showed evidence of virus infection in both blood and cervicovaginal secretions by a combination of in vitro culture and molecular detection methods. The CD4+ cell counts in these women ranged from <200/μl to >500/μl. Blood plasma of 26% women (12/46) did not show detectable levels of human immunodeficiency virus ribonucleic acid by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (<102/100 μl). These same women had significant amounts of human immunodeficiency virus in the cell-free cervicovaginal secretions (102 to 105 copies per 100 μl). In contrast, 17% (8/46) women with significant quantity of human immunodeficiency virus ribonucleic acid in the blood plasma had negative results for human immunodeficiency virus in the cervicovaginal secretions. Further, treatment of women with the antiviral drug zidovudine did not change the human immunodeficiency virus-1 detection rate in plasma ribonucleic acid but showed significant reduction in the ability to detect human immunodeficiency virus ribonucleic acid in cell-free cervicovaginal secretions (p = 0.036). CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the replication kinetics of human immunodeficiency virus in the blood and cervicovaginal cells are unrelated, independent events. Further, there is no correlation between the virus load or the CD4+ cell counts in the blood and the presence or absence of quantifiable human immunodeficiency virus in cervicovaginal secretions. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;175:122-30.)
