Advance Traveller Information Systems (ATIS) are considered a promising tool to alleviate traffic congestion and improve road network performance. They provide real time traffic information and route recommendation to road users, in order to increase their ability to choose the best alternative path. Though such systems have reached a high technical standard, their actual impact in traffic pattern and network performance is controversial. The methodology used is based on a Multi Agent Simulation to model how the presence of information influences the driver´s reactive behavior and the network efficiency. The case study is the well known network of the Braess´ paradox and the specific aim is to find the proper route recommendation strategy to avoid that adding a new road to traffic network may result in increasing the total travel time. Through a software platform able to simulate a virtual road network, where single drivers interact with each other and with the spatial environment according to a defined behavior, that is their reaction to external outputs, two behavioral patterns will be simultaneously considered. The first refers to the driver´s path choice among those available for a fixed origin-destination pair; the second refers, once the path is chosen, to the microscopic motion of each vehicle as a function of the leader vehicle along each link of the network. To simulate the presence of drivers equipped with ATIS system and drivers who are not, or equivalently to simulate different reactive behavior to the information provided, it has been used a variable ?probability of feedback?. Pattern arrival vehicle flow can be varied together with speed and acceleration of the vehicles. The general purpose of the paper is to contribute to the analysis of the impact of ITS (Intelligent Transport Systems) technology in traffic pattern and network performance. The specific objective is modelling driver´s behavior in road networks when real time traffic information is- - provided. The results show that a proper rate of provided information is able to reduce the effect of the Braess´ paradox and that network performance increases when drivers´ behavior is affected by their ability to see local traffic conditions.
