OBJECTIVE: Our purpose was to determine the effect of peripherally administered magnesium sulfate on kainate and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid receptors in the rat brain. STUDY DESIGN: Six rats were injected intraperitoneally with 270 mg/kg magnesium sulfate, followed by 27 mg/kg every 20 minutes for 4 hours. Controls (n = 6) received saline solution. Six rats received intraperitoneal injections of magnesium sulfate (270 mg/kg) every 4 hours for 24 hours and six received saline solution. Then 6 rats received intraperitoneal magnesium sulfate (270 mg/kg) every 12 hours for 2 weeks and six received saline solution. Rats were subsequently perfused and killed; their brains were dissected and frozen. Cryostat sections were labeled in vitro for autoradiography assay. The ligands used were tritiated kainate agonist, kainate binding site; tritiated α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid agonist, and tritiated 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione antagonist, both at the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid binding site. RESULTS: Magnesium sulfate caused decreased binding of the agonist to the kainate receptor recognition site after both short-term and intermediate-term systemic administration, whereas long-term treatment resulted in increased binding. No significant consistent effect on the binding to the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid receptor agonist site was recorded after magnesium administration. The receptor antagonist showed an increased binding after short-term treatment. Long-term administration also resulted in increased binding of the antagonist, an effect that was limited to the hippocampus. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest down-regulation of the kainate receptor population during short- and intermediate-term magnesium sulfate treatment. However, long-term inhibition by magnesium resulted in up-regulation of the receptor population. The results may also reflect an increased inhibitory effect of magnesium sulfate on the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid receptor. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;175:582-7.)
