OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether cordocentesis is associated with the release of vasoactive substances and whether there are differences between normally grown and growth-restricted fetuses. STUDY DESIGN: 6-Keto-prostaglandin F1α (the stable metabolite of prostacyclin), endothelin-1, and cyclic guanosine monophosphate were measured in fetal blood at the beginning and closing of cordocentesis in 30 normally grown fetuses and 25 growth-restricted fetuses. This latter group was characterized by abnormal Doppler index values in umbilical artery and middle cerebral artery, suggestive of chronic hypoxemia as the causative factor of the impaired growth. In six growth-restricted fetuses bradycardia occurred at the end of the procedure. Umbilical artery pulsatility index was measured by Doppler ultrasonography immediately before and after the procedure. RESULTS: The median interval between the two blood samples obtained by cordocentesis was 90 seconds (range 60 to 320 seconds). During this interval a significant rise of 6-keto-prostaglandin F1α ( p ≤ 0.0001) and endothelin-1 ( p = 0.03) was evidenced in normally grown fetuses. The increase in 6-keto-prostaglandin F1α was significantly related (r = 0.52, p = 0.002) to the fall of umbilical artery pulsatility index occurring after the procedure. In growth-restricted fetuses cordocentesis induced a marked increase of endothelin-1 ( p = 0.0002), which was significantly related to the severity of acidosis (r = 0.52, p = 0.018), whereas no modifications were evidenced for the other agents tested. The increase of endothelin-1 was higher in those growth-restricted fetuses showing bradycardia at the end of the procedure than in growth-restricted fetuses that did not ( p = 0.04). The variations of the vasoactive substances assayed were not significantly related to the type of procedure (transamniotic or transplacental), the amount of blood aspirated during the procedure, the interval elapsing between the first and second samples, the gestational age at which the procedure was performed, and the degree of fetal smallness. CONCLUSION: Cordocentesis induces the rapid release of vasoactive substances and the effect differs between normally grown and growth-restricted fetuses. This may explain the different hemodynamic response and the higher rate of complications occurring in the latter group after cordocentesis. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;175:563-70.)
