OBJECTIVE: A pedicled rectus muscle flap sling in the treatment of complicated stress urinary incontinence was evaluated. STUDY DESIGN: Thirty-two women underwent a combined vaginal and abdominal sling operation for stress incontinence with a pedicled muscle flap developed from the rectus abdominis muscle. All operations were performed jointly by the same two surgeons. The procedure involved transecting one rectus abdominis muscle just above its first tendinous intersection and isolating the muscle as a flap on its inferior vascular pedicle. The muscle flap was then swung beneath the urethra and bladder neck, pulled into the retropubic space on the contralateral side, and sewn to the obturator internus fascia or to Cooper's ligament. All patients undergoing the procedure had demonstrable stress incontinence on physical examination and underwent preoperative fluoroscopic video urodynamics. The diagnosis of complicated stress incontinence was based on the presence of one or more of the following factors: previous failed antiincontinence surgery (33 operations in 22 patients, average 1.5 operations), open vesical neck on fluoroscopy (14 patients), urethral closure pressure ≤30 cm H2O by the Brown-Wickham technique (16 patients), or massive vaginal prolapse and demonstrable stress incontinence with the prolapse reduced and the urethra supported in a normal position (16 patients). Follow-up ranged from 2 to 13 months (average 6 months). Surgical outcome was assessed by physical examination and a detailed telephone interview conducted by a physician who was not involved in the operations. RESULTS: Twenty-eight patients (87.5%) were satisfied with the results of the operation. There were four surgical failures (12.5%). Stress incontinence persisted in three patients after surgery, and one patient who had mixed incontinence before surgery was cured of stress incontinence but continued to have significant urinary leakage as a result of detrusor overactivity. There appears to be less voiding dysfunction with this technique than with other sling procedures for stress incontinence. CONCLUSIONS: The sling procedure with a rectus abdominis muscle flap appears to be a viable surgical technique in the treatment of complicated stress incontinence. Further study is needed to assess the long-term results of this operation and to evaluate its proper place in reconstructive pelvic surgery. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;175:1460-6.)
