OBJECTIVE: Our purpose was to survey fellows of the American Association of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Foundation and Reproductive Scientist Development Program regarding their successes and problems and to solicit suggestions for improvement.
STUDY DESIGN: A survey was mailed to each past and current fellow participating in the research fellowships sponsored by the two organizations. The survey requested from each respondent information regarding current research, funding, and academic status and problems they have encountered. Additionally, each respondent was encouraged to make specific suggestions on how to improve these programs.
RESULTS: Of the 54 surveys sent, all were returned (100%). Of these respondents, 30 had American Association of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Foundation fellowships and 24 were in the Reproductive Scientist Development Program, representing 29 different academic programs. Forty-nine (91%) had academic appointments and 6 were either division directors or departmental chairs. Of 39 graduates, 23 (59%) received funding from the National Institutes of Health. Thirty-one past fellows continued basic research and 23 (73%) work in their own or departmental laboratories. Of all respondents, 78% felt that they had good to excellent chances of obtaining funding, and 94% felt that participating in the research training fellowships was critically important for their academic careers.
CONCLUSIONS: Research training fellowships sponsored by the American Association of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Foundation and the Reproductive Scientist Development Program have been extremely successful at keeping talented young obstetricians and gynecologists in academic medicine. Most fellows continue basic science research and have obtained extramural funding. In spite of the current stresses in academic medicine regarding financial restructuring and research funding, these fellowships continue to provide outstanding opportunities for motivated young obstetricians and gynecologists to achieve academic success. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;176:814-8.)

