OBJECTIVE: Our goal was to determine the frequency of mother-to-child transmission of Toxoplasma gondii from human immunodeficiency virus–infected mothers who are also chronically infected with T. gondii.
STUDY DESIGN: One hundred thirty-eight women were entered into a prospective study of human immunodeficiency virus infection in pregnancy. The women were seen at enrollment, during the third, sixth, and eighth months of pregnancy (except those enrolled later in pregnancy or at delivery), at 2 and 6 months post partum, and at 6-month intervals thereafter through 4 years after delivery. Standardized interviews and physical examinations were performed, and blood was drawn at each visit. Toxoplasma serologic testing was performed on the sample drawn earliest in pregnancy; the Sabin-Feldman dye test for immunoglobulin G antibodies and enzyme-linked immunoassays for immunoglobulins M, A, and E were used. Univariate analysis for categoric variables was performed with χ2and two-tailed Fisher exact tests, and for continuous variables the Student t test was used. Statistical Analysis System procedures were followed.
RESULTS: Twenty-eight of 138 (20.2%) women who had positive test results for human immunodeficiency virus had positive findings of the Sabin-Feldman dye test. Serologic status for T. gondii did not correlate with age, immune status, parity, or drug use. One of 27 children born to women who were seropositive for both human immunodeficiency virus and T. gondii (one child's serologic status for T. gondii was unknown) had Sabin-Feldman dye test antibodies beyond age 6 months (3.7%, 95% confidence interval 0.09% to 18.9%). Among the cohort of human immunodeficiency virus–infected mothers the rate of mother-to-child human immunodeficiency virus transmission did not vary with maternal Toxoplasma status. However, with sample sizes of 28 and 110, respectively, for the mothers who were T. gondii seropositive and seronegative, the power to detect a difference in the human immunodeficiency virus transmission rate between these groups would be relatively small.
CONCLUSIONS: Transmission of T. gondii from a chronically infected mother can occur in the setting of a human immunodeficiency virus infection, but this is not a common phenomenon. In a small cohort of human immunodeficiency virus–infected women we did not observe its occurrence among those without severe immunocompromise.(Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;167:555-9.)

