OBJECTIVE: Our purpose was to develop a profile of preoperative and perioperative characteristics that would enable gynecologic oncologists to identify those patients with ovarian cancer who would benefit most from postoperative surgical intensive care unit care and thereby optimize resource utilization and cost effectiveness.
STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective analysis was performed of 85 patients admitted to the surgical intensive care unit after cytoreductive surgery between Jan. 1, 1989, and Dec. 31, 1993. Fifty-three patients admitted to the surgical intensive care unit for <24 hours were compared with 32 patients admitted for >24 hours. Five preoperative characteristics (age, American Society of Anaesthesiology classification, body mass index, albumin, primary versus recurrent disease) and six perioperative characteristics (estimated blood loss, ascites, surgical time, bowel resection, Swan-Ganz catheter, ventilator dependence) were compared across the two groups by univariate analysis and multivariate logistic regression analyses.
RESULTS: All preoperative variables were similar across the two groups. Ascites volume and length of surgery were not significant, whereas estimated blood loss was significant in the univariate analysis but not in the logistic regression analysis. Three perioperative variables were found to be predictive of extended surgical intensive care unit care by logistic regression analysis: placement of a Swan-Ganz catheter (odds ratio 4.31, 95% confidence interval 1.13 to 16.4), bowel resection (odds ratio 13.0, 95% confidence interval 1.96 to 86.5), and ventilator dependence (excluded from logistic regression analysis for mathematic reasons).
CONCLUSIONS: The patient's preoperative medical condition proved to be less important than how she fares during surgery. The patient most likely to benefit from surgical intensive care unit care had undergone bowel resection, required invasive hemodynamic monitoring, or was ventilator dependent postoperatively. This patient profile may prove to be a useful screening tool to optimize resource utilization and cost effectiveness, but it cannot replace clinical judgment. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;176:1389-93.)

