OBJECTIVE: This study was undertaken to evaluate the deoxyribonucleic acid content and S-phase fraction in advanced epithelial ovarian carcinomas to determine whether lymph node metastases are biologically distinct from peritoneal sites of metastases.
STUDY DESIGN: Thirty-five patients with stage III or IV epithelial ovarian cancer who had undergone complete pelvic and paraaortic lymphadenectomy had representative samples from the primary ovarian tumor, peritoneal metastases, and lymph node metastases analyzed by flow cytometry for deoxyribonucleic acid nuclear content and S-phase fraction.
RESULTS: Diploid cell lines are found in metastatic lymph nodes (52%) significantly more frequently than in peritoneal metastases (25%, p< 0.02) or in primary ovarian tumors (26%, p< 0.001). The ploidy category frequency distribution of peritoneal metastases mirrors that found in the primary tumor, and both are significantly different from the ploidy category frequency distribution found in metastatic lymph nodes. Heterogeneity among sites is common, being identified in 54% of patients. Peritoneal metastases are more likely to be concordant with the primary tumor (69%) than are lymph node metastases (39%, p< 0.001). Mean S-phase fraction did not differ overall by site but was significantly different between diploid and aneuploid samples by site. Diploid lymph node metastases were found to have the lowest mean S-phase fraction (7.2% ± 3.3%), and aneuploid lymph node metastases had the highest mean S-phase fraction (22.3% ± 10.2%). Diploidy of the primary tumor is a positive predictor of long-term survival. Tumoral heterogeneity and lymph node metastases are not related to survival in this group of patients who underwent therapeutic pelvic and aortic lymphadenectomy.
CONCLUSIONS: A high proportion of tumor deposits found in metastatic lymph nodes are diploid with a low S-phase fraction. Therapeutic pelvic and aortic lymph node dissection removes disease that, on the basis of flow cytometric characteristics, may be predicted to be resistant to chemotherapy and radiation therapy. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;176:1319-27.)

