OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to document the observation that fine-needle aspiration of palpable breast masses by use of a modified technique performed shortly before mammography need not adversely interfere with mammographic interpretation nor produce falsely suspicious mammographic lesions that delay meaningful evaluation and management in this breast clinic.
STUDY DESIGN: In a retrospective record review 1007 women who were seen in the Breast Diagnostic Center at Women's and Children's Hospital from January 1992 until April 1995 and who had fine-needle aspiration of a palpable solid breast mass within 2 weeks before mammography were analyzed overall and in 10-year age group subsets. The mammographic reports of “suspicious” lesions were correlated with having had a prior fine-needle aspiration (within 2 weeks).
RESULTS: Of the 1007 women undergoing fine-needle aspirations, 91 had a cytologic or tissue biopsy specimen diagnosis of malignancy. Of these, 72 had “suspicious” mammograms and 19 had “nonsuspicious” mammograms. The calculated positive predictive value was 58%. The negative predictive value was 98%. Mammographic sensitivity was 79%. Specificity was 94%. Age stratification did not reveal any meaningful trends. Of the 916 patients with benign cytologic results of fine-needle aspiration specimens, 52 had “suspicious” mammograms and 864 had “nonsuspicious” mammograms.
CONCLUSION: For patient convenience and expeditious diagnosis of a palpable breast mass, fine-needle aspiration can be performed on the initial visit and mammograms subsequently taken within 2 weeks without undue clinical confusion or misleading mammographic findings. Concordance of the diagnostic triad consisting of (1) clinical impression (by history and examination), (2) fine-needle aspiration, and (3) mammography gives a reliable conclusion and can appropriately be used as the basis for clinical management of a breast mass. However, when there is doubt or anxiety about the diagnosis either on the part of the patient or the physician, a definitive histologic tissue diagnosis should obtained. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;176:1286-92.)

