Objective: The aim of the current study was to determine levels of circulating endothelial cell adhesion molecules during preeclampsia and to assess their predictive value as diagnostic markers for the early identification of pregnant women at risk of developing preeclampsia. Study design: Plasma samples were obtained from women with preeclampsia; the syndrome of hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets; uncomplicated pregnancy-induced hypertension; and women with normal pregnancy. In addition, longitudinal plasma profiles of pregnant women were randomly collected to determine individual profiles of circulating endothelial cell adhesion molecules. A sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay technique was used to quantitate concentrations of soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (CD54), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (CD106), E-selectin (CD62E), platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule (CD31), and P-selectin (CD62P). Results: Plasma levels of intercellular adhesion molecule-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, E-selectin, and platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 were significantly elevated in women with preeclampsia compared with healthy control pregnant women. Longitudinal analysis of soluble plasma intercellular adhesion molecule-1 and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 levels during pregnancy revealed that these molecules (1) show little variation in healthy pregnant women, (2) do not vary during normal pregnancy, and (3) are significantly elevated in women with preeclampsia and the syndrome of hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets compared with control pregnant women and those with uncomplicated pregnancy-induced hypertension. Analysis of soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 levels in longitudinal profiles of pregnant women identified significantly elevated levels of these molecules in the plasma of preeclampsia-prone women 3 to 15 weeks before the onset of clinical symptoms. Conclusion: Elevated soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 measurements during pregnancy can be considered as major risk factors. Elevated levels of these substances in the plasma of pregnant women with preeclampsia support the concept of a primary endothelial cell involvement in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. Although currently based on a limited database, significantly elevated levels of soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 in the plasma of otherwise healthy pregnant women suggest a very high predictive value of these molecules for the earliest identification of women at risk of developing preeclampsia. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;177:443-9.)
