OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to compare the accuracy of the TDxFLM test (Abbott Laboratories) with the fetal lung maturity cascade (shake, foam stability index, lecithin/sphingomyelin tests) and to determine whether the TDxFLM test could increase the efficiency and reduce the cost without decreasing the reliability of a cascade.
STUDY DESIGN: A prospective, single-blinded study was conducted. Uncontaminated amniotic fluid obtained by transabdominal amniocentesis for fetal lung maturity assessment was evaluated with use of the fetal lung maturity cascade and the TDxFLM test. At study completion the results of the TDxFLM test were compared with those of the maturity cascade with regard to hyaline membrane disease, which was defined by strict clinical and radiographic parameters. A power analysis was performed requiring a sample size of 100 infants delivered within 72 hours of amniocentesis with use of the 95% confidence interval.
RESULTS: A total of 115 cases had a full maturity cascade performed, of which 40 (35%) had a positive shake or foam stability index and 75 cases required progression to a lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio because of negative results. The TDxFLM test result was ≥70 mg/gm in 42 (37%) of these 115. One hundred eight newborns were delivered within 72 hours of the amniocentesis; 65% (71) of these were between 30 and 37 weeks of estimated gestational age. There were 7 cases of hyaline membrane disease in the 108 newborns. Of these 108, 87 had a mature original cascade versus 85 mature tests with use of a proposed TDxFLM test–lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio cascade with one case of respiratory distress syndrome and hyaline membrane disease. The sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values for the original cascade were 86%, 84%, 27%, and 99%, respectively; for the proposed TDxFLM test–lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio cascade the values were 86%, 83%, 26%, and 99%, respectively. The TDxFLM test–lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio cascade would have resulted in a cost reduction of 24% with no significant delay in turnaround time.
CONCLUSION: The TDxFLM test appears to be a reliable and accurate assessment of fetal lung maturity. Furthermore, by replacing the shake and foam stability index portion of the cascade with the TDxFLM test, a cost savings of 24% would occur without a decrease in safety. These results also reveal that it could enhance patient care and be cost efficient for institutions not currently doing fetal pulmonary maturity testing to undertake use of the TDxFLM test and to only send out specimens for a lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio that have an initial immature TDxFLM test result (<70 mg/gm). Likewise, institutions currently only performing a lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio may consider a TDxFLM test–lecithin sphingomyelin ratio cascade. Although direct costs would increase, they would be counterbalanced by a significant reduction in laboratory technician time. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;177:835-41.)

