Objective: Fetal fibronectin bedside testing has been proposed as a diagnostic tool for the accurate diagnosis of preterm labor. The study objective was to determine whether the introduction of routine fetal fibronectin bedside testing affected costs and transfer rates from referral district hospitals to a tertiary obstetric hospital, as well as direct admissions to a tertiary referral hospital. Study Design: We performed an 18-month prospective audit of fetal fibronectin use in 9 referral hospitals and one university maternal-fetal medicine unit. Data collected were delivery details and cervical dilatation at admission. Cost savings in terms of transport costs for patients with a negative fetal fibronectin result who were not transferred or admitted to the tertiary center were calculated for interhospital transfer (road ambulance or fixed-wing retrieval). Results: One hundred fifty-one patients had a presumptive diagnosis of threatened preterm labor. Forty-five patients had a positive fetal fibronectin result and 106 had a negative fetal fibronectin result (3 with cervical dilatation ≥3 cm). Eleven (24%) patients with a positive fetal fibronectin result were delivered within 7 days, and 5 (5%) with a negative fetal fibronectin result were delivered within 7 days. One patient was delivered at 34 weeks, and the remaining patients were delivered at or after 36 weeks’ gestation. All 3 patients with negative fetal fibronectin results with cervical dilatation of ≥3 cm were delivered within 5 days, leaving 2 (1.9%) patients (with closed cervices and negative fetal fibronectin results) being delivered 5 days after the fetal fibronectin testing. Ninety percent of the patients admitted to a referral hospital with threatened preterm labor who had a negative fetal fibronectin result were not transferred; thus an unnecessary transfer was avoided, with cost savings ranging from $30,297 for road and fixed-wing transport. Conclusion: A negative fetal fibronectin result is not helpful if cervical dilatation is present, and these patients should be treated as having a high risk of preterm delivery. The use of a fetal fibronectin test was associated with a 90% reduction in maternal transfer and can substantially reduce the costs and inconvenience associated with unnecessary transfer. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;182:439-42.)
