Objective: The purposes of this study were to determine (1) whether uterine tissues as well as the fetal placenta are involved in the development of prostaglandin-synthesizing capacity associated with impending labor in pregnant sheep and (2) whether the key enzyme of prostaglandin synthesis, prostaglandin H synthase 2, is differentially expressed in the different intrauterine tissues during late gestation and in association with labor. Study Design: Myometrium, endometrium, and fetal placenta were removed from ewes at 95 days’ gestation, (n = 3), 101 to 110 days’ gestation (n = 3), 111 to 120 days’ gestation (n = 3), 121 to 130 days’ gestation (n = 3), 131 to 140 days’ gestation (n = 3), and 141 to 145 days’ gestation (n = 4) and from ewes in spontaneous term labor at 143 to 147 days’ gestation (n = 4). Expressions of prostaglandin H synthase 2 messenger ribonucleic acid and protein were determined by Northern blot and Western blot analyses. Prostaglandin H synthase 2 was localized in the fetal placenta by immunohistochemical means. Results: Levels of both prostaglandin H synthase 2 messenger ribonucleic acid and protein increased gradually from 115 days’ gestation in the fetal placenta and from 131 days’ gestation in the endometrium. A further and more significant increase in prostaglandin H synthase 2 concentration occurred in the placenta and endometrium during spontaneous term labor. In contrast, myometrial concentrations of prostaglandin H synthase 2 messenger ribonucleic acid and protein remained at steady basal levels during the course of pregnancy and increased only during labor. Prostaglandin H synthase 2 was localized in the trophoblast cells of the fetal placenta. Conclusions: Tissue-specific ontogenic expression of prostaglandin H synthase 2 was observed in myometrium, endometrium, and placenta during late ovine gestation and spontaneous term labor. Fetal placenta and endometrium showed increased expression of prostaglandin H synthase 2 messenger ribonucleic acid and protein during late ovine gestation, whereas myometrial prostaglandin H synthase 2 concentration remained low throughout late gestation. Prostaglandin H synthase 2 concentrations in the myometrium, endometrium, and placenta are all upwardly regulated during labor. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999;181:1512-9.)
