Objective: We sought to investigate the subclinical effect of external cephalic version on fetal circulation. Study Design: A prospective observational study was conducted on 136 subjects who had external cephalic version at or beyond 36 weeks of gestation without clinical complication. Doppler ultrasonographic studies of the umbilical and middle cerebral circulations were performed before and after the external cephalic version. The following Doppler indexes were measured: (1) the pulsatility index of the umbilical artery, which represents disturbance of placental circulation, and (2) the pulsatility index of the fetal middle cerebral artery, which represents fetal response. The Wilcoxon signed rank test was used for all statistical analyses. Results: There was no significant difference in pulsatility index of the umbilical artery before and after external cephalic version (P = .674). There was a statistically significant reduction in the pulsatility index of the middle cerebral artery after external cephalic version (P = .043), and this difference existed only among multiparous women (P = .029), among those in whom the external cephalic version was considered to be difficult (P = .038), and when the placenta was posteriorly located (P = .028). The reduction in pulsatility index was not related to whether the external cephalic version was successful. In all cases the Doppler indexes remained within the normal ranges, and there were no associated fetal complications. Conclusion: External cephalic version was not associated with any significant disturbance of placental resistance to blood flow. Conversely, external cephalic version was associated with a significant reduction in the pulsatility index of the middle cerebral circulation, especially among the multiparous women, after a difficult procedure or in those with a posterior placenta. This probably represents a normal fetal physiologic response to manipulation of the fetal head. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;182:1239-42.)
