Objective: This study was undertaken to determine the prevalence of thromboembolic events among women with extended bed rest prescribed as part of the treatment of premature labor or preterm premature rupture of membranes. Study Design: A retrospective chart review was undertaken of all women who had bed rest of ≥3 days’ duration prescribed as part of the treatment of premature labor or preterm premature rupture of membranes in the Akron General Medical Center Perinatal Unit during the period January 1, 1997–December 31, 1998. The prevalence of thromboembolic events in this population was determined. The charts of all additional gravid women with antepartum or postpartum deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism diagnosed during the study period were also reviewed. The prevalence of these disorders among the pregnant population for whom extended bed rest was not prescribed as part of the treatment of premature labor or preterm premature rupture of membranes was also calculated. Statistical comparison of the prevalences in the 2 populations was undertaken by means of the χ2 analysis with the Fisher exact test. Results: There were 192 patients admitted during the study period who had extended bed rest prescribed as part of the treatment of premature labor or preterm premature rupture of membranes. Three of these women had thromboembolic events, for a prevalence of 15.6 cases per 1000 women. Five additional gravid women were admitted for the treatment of deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism. There were 6164 deliveries among women not treated with extended bed rest for premature labor or preterm premature rupture of membranes during this period. Thus the prevalence of these phenomena among the remaining pregnant women was 0.8 cases per 1000 women. The prevalences of these disorders in the 2 populations were highly significantly different. Conclusion: The prevalence of thromboembolic events among women for whom extended bed rest is prescribed as part of the treatment of premature labor or preterm premature rupture of membranes is significantly increased with respect to that among gravid women who do not receive this therapy and is substantially higher than previously reported. If this finding is confirmed in other populations, it may be prudent to undertake further studies to determine whether this prevalence can be reduced. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;182:1089-92.)
