Objective: We sought to investigate the effect of a decrease of maternal plasma osmolality produced by hypotonic rehydration on the fetal urine production rate in normal near-term human fetuses. Study Design: Twenty-one healthy pregnant women attending the clinic for antenatal care were studied between 37 and 40 weeks’ gestation. The fetal urine production rate was assessed by serial measurements of 3 diameters of the fetal bladder. The hourly fetal urine production rate was determined by linear regression analysis of the calculated bladder volumes versus time and was initially determined after a period of 4 hours of fluid deprivation. Thereafter, the women were asked to drink 1 L of water, and the hourly fetal urine production rate was assessed again. The hourly fetal urine production rate was only studied during behavioral state 1F because it is dependent on the behavioral state. The fetal behavioral state was determined by assessment of fetal heart rate, fetal eye movements, and fetal body movements. Results: Successful recordings were obtained in 10 of the 21 women. The hourly fetal urine production rate increased significantly after hypotonic rehydration (P< .02). Compared with the initial hourly fetal urine production rate after 4 hours of fluid deprivation, the hourly fetal urine production rate showed an increase of 63.2% after hypotonic rehydration, from 38.2 ± 16.3 mL/h to 62.4 ± 34.6 mL/h (mean ± SD). After rehydration, the baseline fetal heart rate fell significantly, from 141 ± 6 to 132 ± 8 beats/min (mean ± SD; P = .005). Conclusion: The fetal urine production rate is augmented after acute maternal oral hypotonic rehydration after 4 hours of fluid deprivation. The current findings demonstrate that the near-term human fetus can handle such acute changes in fluid osmolality by increasing the urine production rate to maintain its fluid homeostasis. This mechanism implies that changes in maternal plasma osmolality and volume probably play an important role in determining amniotic fluid volume. Therefore the application of maternal hydration for the treatment of oligohydramnios should be further investigated. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;183:226-9.)
