Objective: We sought to use an in vitro approach to determine relationships between meconium and fetal lung liquid production and to relate meconium to possible problems in lung liquid removal at birth. Study Design: Near-term fetal guinea pigs were divided according to the level of spontaneously occurring meconium (no meconium, light meconium, or heavy meconium). Their lungs were maintained in vitro in Krebs-Henseleit saline solution for 3 hours. Lung liquid production or reabsorption was measured by a dye-dilution method, and loss of lactate to the lung liquid and outer Krebs-Henseleit solution was monitored. Reabsorptions were investigated by activating powerful responses with dinitrophenol during the middle hour. Results: During the first hour, lungs from meconium-free fetuses produced liquid at 1.25 ± 0.12 mL/kg–1 body weight • h–1; rates from light or heavy meconium groups were not significantly different (n = 18). Similarly, total lactate loss was not significantly different between the meconium-free and light-meconium groups but was twice as high in heavy-meconium preparations (73.68 ± 10.60 μmol/L • g–1 dry lung tissue • h–1; P< .025, analysis of variance). The meconium-free and heavy-meconium groups continued to produce fluid, with no significant change throughout the 3 hours of incubation; lactate losses fell slightly. Therefore there were no problems with fluid production with meconium present, but the high-lactate losses with heavy meconium suggested long-term intrauterine hypoxia. Dinitrophenol produced powerful reabsorptions in lungs from meconium-free fetuses (–0.85 ± 0.35 mL • kg–1 body weight • h–1; P< .005, analysis of variance; P< .0005, regression analysis) but failed to do so in heavy-meconium fetuses (n = 36). Lactate losses rose 2-fold in both groups (P< .005 to P< 0.0005, analysis of variance and regression analysis), despite already elevated losses with heavy meconium (n = 12). Therefore, in heavy-meconium fetuses, dinitrophenol affected metabolic pathways but did not activate fluid reabsorption, suggesting damage to reabsorptive mechanisms. Conclusion: Unless major airways are blocked, meconium is not associated with reduced fetal lung liquid production, which can cause poor lung development, but there may well be poor fluid removal after birth because of compromised reabsorptive mechanisms, which are unlikely to be helped by possible hormonal intervention. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;183:235-44.)
