Objective: We sought to determine whether preimplantation genetic diagnosis is associated with particular pregnancy or delivery complications. Study Design: A total of 102 consecutive pregnancies after preimplantation genetic diagnosis by polar body removal performed at Illinois Masonic Medical Center resulting in 114 live births were analyzed. All patients were given a delivery and newborn questionnaire, and attempts were made to contact and question them regarding any pregnancy complications and type of delivery. Permission was obtained to examine medical records and discuss the patient’s pregnancy with her obstetrician when questions existed with respect to complications or indication for cesarean delivery. Results: Delivery and newborn questionnaires were completed or telephone contact was achieved for 100 of the 102 pregnancies. There were 85 singleton, 9 twin, and 7 triplet pregnancies. Of the 7 triplet gestations, 3 couples elected multifetal pregnancy reduction to twins and healthy triplets were born to 4 couples between 32 and 36 weeks by cesarean delivery. Of the 80 singleton deliveries, 60 (75%) progressed to term. Of these 60 term singleton deliveries, 34 were vaginal, 23 were cesarean (40%), and 3 delivery types were unknown. The incidence of small-for-gestational-age infants was 3% for neonates in the 60 term singleton deliveries and 7% in the entire cohort of 80 singleton deliveries. Only 3 pregnancy complications (other than premature delivery) were reported more than once. There were 3 instances each of gestational diabetes, intrauterine growth restriction, and pregnancy-induced hypertension. There was 1 case each of HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets) syndrome, congestive heart failure, mild oligohydramnios, and abruptio placentae. The indications for cesarean delivery were (in descending order) failure of labor to progress (n = 7), fetal distress (n = 4), placenta previa (n = 4), elective repeat cesarean delivery (n = 4), triplets (n = 3), uterine scarring (n = 3), 1 twin in the breech position (n = 3), failed forceps delivery (n = 2), and a variety of other indications that occurred in only 1 patient each. All preimplantation genetic diagnoses were confirmed by prenatal or postnatal testing. No diagnostic errors were made in this cohort of patients or in any patients undergoing preimplantation genetic diagnosis having polar body removal in our center. Conclusions: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis is associated with a risk of multiple gestations, cesarean delivery, and placenta previa. Cesarean delivery rates and multiple gestation rates are comparable to those of patients undergoing in vitro fertilization in general. The preimplantation genetic diagnosis itself does not seem to cause an increased risk for any particular pregnancy complication, with the possible exception of placenta previa, which was seen in 4% of patients. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;182:1629-32.)
