Objective: The purpose of this study was to determine whether corticosteroid administration to patients with antepartum HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet count) syndrome would alter laboratory values diagnostic for the disease. Study Design: Cases of 37 women with antepartum HELLP syndrome managed between March 1995 and July 1999 were reviewed. Patients were classified on the basis of exposure to corticosteroids and to the dose used. Group 1 did not receive corticosteroids. Group 2 received a standard corticosteroid dosage regimen for promotion of fetal lung maturation. Group 3 received a high-dose corticosteroid regimen of >24 mg/d (most frequently 10 mg dexamethasone as an intravenous bolus dose every 6 hours for 2 doses followed by 6 mg as an intravenous bolus dose every 6 hours for 2 to 4 doses). Antepartum changes in laboratory values from diagnosis to delivery were evaluated by means of the Kruskal-Wallis test. Results: Eleven patients did not receive corticosteroids, 15 were given a standard dose, and 11 received high-dose therapy. For each laboratory value assessed (platelet count, aspartate aminotransferase activity, and lactate dehydrogenase activity), the corticosteroid groups differed significantly from the no-treatment group (P ≤ .002 for all). A further, significantly greater improvement in platelet count was noted between the high-dose group (81%) and the standard-dose group (17%; P = .04). The interval from diagnosis to delivery was also longer for patients treated with the high-dose protocol (51 ± 25 hours) than for both those treated with a standard regimen (26 ± 20 hours) and those who received no treatment (13 ± 11 hours; P< .001). Conclusion: Administration of corticosteroids to patients with antepartum HELLP syndrome improves platelet count, reduces liver enzyme abnormalities, and prolongs latency to delivery in a dose-dependent manner. Higher doses of corticosteroid than those traditionally prescribed for promotion of fetal pulmonary maturation should be considered for maternal and fetal benefits in cases of severe preeclampsia. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;183:921-4.)
