Objective: Retrovirus-mediated gene transfer has been shown to transduce CD34+ cells from term gestation umbilical cord blood with relatively high efficiency. The purpose of this study was to compare the efficiencies of retrovirus-mediated gene transfer into early (23-28 weeks’ gestation) and term (37-41 weeks’ gestation) umbilical cord blood CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells. Study Design: CD34+ cells were purified from cyropreserved early (23-28 weeks’ gestation) and term (37-40 weeks’ gestation) umbilical cord blood specimens with fluorescence-activated cell sorting. The CD34+ cells were then transduced in virus-containing medium (gibbon ape leukemia virus pseudotype vector LAPSN [PG13]) in wells coated with the recombinant human fibronectin fragment CH-296 and in the presence of multiple hematopoietic growth factors (interleukin 6, stem cell factor, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and megakaryocyte growth and development factor) and protamine sulfate. The LAPSN (PG13) virus–containing medium was changed every 12 hours for 48 hours, after which time colony-forming cells were assayed in soft agar. The gibbon ape leukemia virus pseudotype vector LAPSN (PG13) contains the human placental alkaline phosphatase and neomycin phosphotransferase (neo) genes. The efficiency of gene transfer was assessed by histochemical staining of colony-forming cells in agar for expression of heat-stable alkaline phosphatase. Results: Gene transfers, as assessed by alkaline phosphatase staining of colony-forming cells (granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming units and erythroid burst-forming units), were similar for CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells from early (58.4% ± 11.8%) and term (63.2% ± 12.5%) gestation fetal umbilical cord blood. Conclusion: CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells from midgestation fetal blood can be transduced with high efficiency using techniques optimized for postnatal samples with a gibbon ape leukemia virus pseudotype vector. The early fetus may be a preferable target for gene therapy because of the higher number of circulating CD34+ and CD38– cells relative to term cord blood, their greater proliferative capacity, and the rapid expansion of the fetal hematopoietic system that occurs from the second trimester to delivery. Because in vitro studies of gene transfer into hematopoietic progenitor cells and long-term culture-initiation cells have not been predictive of the efficiency of gene transfer into marrow-repopulating cells in vivo, studies that examine clinically applicable approaches to in utero gene therapy in appropriate animal models are still needed. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;183:732-7.)
