Objective: The purpose of this study was to determine whether the elevation of secretory group II phospholipase A2 concentration in the serum and amniotic fluid in preterm labor is associated with intrauterine inflammation. Study Design: Serum and amniotic fluid were collected from women with preterm delivery (<37 weeks’ gestation; N = 38) and term delivery (n = 20). Phospholipase activity was measured with a highly sensitive system that was based on reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatographic separation of 9-anthracenylmethyl derivatives of fatty acids released by phospholipase A2. The concentrations of immunoreactive isozymes (group I or II) of secretory phospholipase A2 were assayed with a radioimmunoassay kit with a monoclonal antibody against human pancreatic phospholipase A2 and splenic IIA phospholipase A2. Localization of immunoreactive group II phospholipase A2 in the amniotic membrane was determined by immunostaining visualized with the Vectastain ABC (Vector Laboratories, Inc, Burlingame, Calif) method. Results: Enzymatic activities of phospholipase A2 in the serum and amniotic fluid specimens obtained from patients in preterm labor with chorioamnionitis were significantly higher than those in specimens from patients in term labor. Significant elevations of phospholipase A2 activities were observed in patients with preterm labor without histologically evident chorioamnionitis. The activity of phospholipase A2 was clearly correlated with the concentration of the immunoreactive group II phospholipase A2. Group II phospholipase A2 was localized in amniotic cells obtained from patients with a pathologically determined diagnosis of chorioamnionitis. The predictive value for chorioamnionitis of the group II phospholipase A2 concentration was relatively higher than the predictive values of the concentrations of C-reactive protein and interleukins 6 and 8. Conclusion: Significant elevations of group II phospholipase A2 concentrations were detected in the serum and amniotic fluid of women with preterm labor. Group II phospholipase A2 concentration may be a useful indicator for preterm labor, and phospholipid metabolism is certainly activated both in preterm labor and in apparent inflammatory diseases. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;183:1537-43.)
