Objective: The purpose of this study was to identify the placental expression of adrenomedullin and adrenomedullin receptor messenger ribonucleic acid and compare them between placentas from pregnancies associated with oligohydramnios as a result of uteroplacental insufficiency and placentas from normal pregnancies. Study Design: Total ribonucleic acid was extracted from the amnion, chorion, cotyledon, umbilical vein, and umbilical artery in 5 normal placentas and 3 placentas from pregnancies complicated by oligohydramnios. A cell line known to express messenger ribonucleic acid of adrenomedullin and its receptor was used to optimize the polymerase chain reaction and served as a positive control preparation in all experiments. Semiquantitative reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction results for adrenomedullin and adrenomedullin receptor were compared between tissues as densitometric ratios of adrenomedullin or adrenomedullin receptor messenger ribonucleic acid to β2-microglobulin messenger ribonucleic acid. Results were analyzed with a Kruskal-Wallis 1-way analysis of variance. Immunohistochemical staining with an antibody to human adrenomedullin was used to localize adrenomedullin in all tissue types. Results: Messenger ribonucleic acid sequences for adrenomedullin and adrenomedullin receptor genes were identified in all tested placental tissue components. Within the normal placentas the expressions of adrenomedullin and adrenomedullin receptor messenger ribonucleic acid sequences did not differ statistically between the tissue components. Within placentas from patients with oligohydramnios the expressions of adrenomedullin and adrenomedullin receptor messenger ribonucleic acid did not differ statistically between the tissue components. When normal placentas were compared with placentas from pregnancies complicated by oligohydramnios, however, a 5-fold increase in adrenomedullin messenger ribonucleic acid and a 3-fold increase in adrenomedullin receptor messenger ribonucleic acid were seen in placentas from patients with oligohydramnios. Adrenomedullin immunoreactivity was present in all tissues studied. Conclusion: The expression of messenger ribonucleic acid for both adrenomedullin and its receptor in these tissue components implies that placental tissues function in both synthesis and action of adrenomedullin. The increased adrenomedullin messenger ribonucleic acid expression in the umbilical artery and the elevated adrenomedullin receptor messenger ribonucleic acid expression in the cotyledons of placentas from patients with oligohydramnios may represent a local fetoplacental physiologic adaptive response to vascular compromise. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;183:1213-9.)
