Objective: Our goal was to determine whether there are racial differences in the severity of illness on admission for premature newborn infants independent of gestational age. Study Design: The study population consisted of all African American and Caucasian singleton infants with gestational ages <34 weeks who were admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit at Brigham and Women’s Hospital between December 1994 and November 1995. Illness severity was measured with a neonatal severity of illness score, the SNAP score (Score for Neonatal Acute Physiology). The SNAP score is a physiologic scoring system that ranks the worst physiologic derangements in each organ system in the first 12 hours of life. It is an objective measure of neonatal illness severity with scores ranging from 0 (healthy) to 42 (most severely ill). Student t tests, χ2 analysis, and Fisher exact tests were used to assess statistical significance. Linear and logistic regression analyses were used to examine associations while confounding factors were controlled for. Results: There were 129 (79%) Caucasian and 36 (22%) African American newborns included in the analysis. Caucasian newborns had significantly higher mean SNAP scores than African American newborns (8.8 vs 6.3; P< .05). Compared with African American newborns, Caucasian newborns were more than twice as likely to have a SNAP score >10 (33% vs 14%; P< .05). In a linear regression analysis in which we controlled for gestational age, birth weight, preterm premature rupture of membranes, preterm labor, preeclampsia, intrapartum fever ≥100.4°F, route of delivery, and other maternal and fetal factors, African American newborns were predicted to have a SNAP score that was on average 3.0 points lower than that of Caucasian newborns (P = .005). In a logistic regression in which we controlled for the above-mentioned confounders, African American newborns were only 14% as likely to have a SNAP score >10 when compared with Caucasian newborns (odds ratio, 0.14; 95% confidence interval, 0.04-0.51). Conclusions: Over a broad range of prematurity, Caucasian newborns were more ill than African American newborns on admission to the neonatal intensive care unit. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001;184:668-72.)
