Objective: The aim of this study was to determine whether positive results of tests for any of 5 antiphospholipid antibodies are associated with recurrent preeclampsia among women with a history of preeclampsia in a previous pregnancy. Study Design: Second-trimester serum samples were obtained from 317 women with preeclampsia in a previous pregnancy who were being followed up in a prospective treatment trial. The serum samples were measured by enzyme-linked immunoassay for immunoglobulin G and immunoglobulin M antibodies against 5 phospholipids. Positive results were analyzed with regard to preeclampsia, severe preeclampsia, intrauterine growth restriction, and preterm delivery. Results: Sixty-two of the 317 women (20%) had recurrent preeclampsia develop, 19 (6%) had severe preeclampsia, and 18 (5.8%) were delivered of infants with growth restriction. Positive results of tests for immunoglobulin G or immunoglobulin M antiphospholipid antibodies were not associated with recurrent preeclampsia. Positive results for immunoglobulin G or immunoglobulin M antibodies at the 99th percentile were also not associated with preterm delivery. Positive results at the 99th percentile for immunoglobulin G antiphosphatidylserine antibody were associated with severe preeclampsia, and positive results at the 99th percentile for immunoglobulin G anticardiolipin, antiphosphatidylinositol, and antiphosphatidylglycerol antibodies were associated with intrauterine growth restriction. The positive predictive values for these outcomes all were approximately 30%. Conclusion: Positive results of testing for antiphospholipid antibodies in the second trimester were not associated with recurrent preeclampsia among women at risk because of a history of preeclampsia. Positive results for immunoglobulin G antiphosphatidylserine antibody were associated with severe preeclampsia, and positive results for immunoglobulin G anticardiolipin, antiphosphatidylinositol, and antiphosphatidylglycerol antibodies were associated with intrauterine growth restriction. However, the positive predictive values for all these associations were modest. Testing for antiphospholipid antibodies during pregnancy is of little prognostic value in the assessment of the risk for recurrent preeclampsia among women with a history of preeclampsia. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001;184:825-34.)
