Objective(S): Raloxifene, a selective estrogen receptor modulator, has beneficial estrogen agonist effects on bone and cardiovascular risk factors and estrogen antagonist effects on the breast and uterus. Limited clinical data have shown a sustained decrease in total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and homocysteine levels; an elevated homocysteine level is an independent risk factor for atherosclerosis. All of these studies were conducted in relatively young populations of women (mean age, 52-54 years). Raloxifene does not affect hot flushes, a major immediate symptom of menopause. This drug may therefore be useful in older women to prevent osteoporosis and cardiovascular disease. The aim of this clinical study was to evaluate the effects of raloxifene on plasma lipids and homocysteine in older women. Study Design: The subjects were 45 healthy postmenopausal women, aged 60 to 70 years. The women were randomly assigned to therapy with raloxifene or placebo, 60 mg/d for 1 year. Twenty-six women received raloxifene and 19 received placebo. Checkups were performed every 3 months. At baseline and after 3, 6, 9, and 12 months of treatment we measured homocysteine, total serum cholesterol, triglycerides, and both high-density lipoprotein and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Results: An effect on lipids was evident by 3 months with no significant additional modification at 12 months. Mean low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels were lowered by 15% and total cholesterol was lowered by 8.5%. No reduction in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol or triglycerides was observed. After 3 months of therapy, homocysteine was significantly lower than at baseline (9.9 ± 1.6 vs 11 ± 2.1 μmol/L; P< .05). The greatest reduction with respect to baseline was reached after 6 months of therapy (–19.5% ± 3%; P< .05). Conclusion(S): The results of our study show that raloxifene at a dose of 60 mg/d reduces serum concentrations of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and total cholesterol in healthy older women. Our study shows that in older women raloxifene leads to a 19.5% ± 3% reduction in fasting homocysteine levels. Raloxifene may have a favorable effect on the incidence of cardiovascular disease in older women. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001;184:350-3.)
