Objective: Endometrial cancers often arise in a setting of estrogen stimulation unopposed by the differentiating effects of progesterone. Our laboratory and others have previously shown that progesterone receptor down-regulation or perturbation of progesterone receptor isoform A or B expression is associated with the development of poorly differentiated endometrial cancers that are not growth inhibited by progestins. The purpose of these studies was to reestablish high progesterone receptor isoform A and B gene expressions in such endometrial cancer cells and to examine the effects of progestin treatment on cell growth and metastatic potential after this transformation. Study Design: To induce high levels of expression of the progesterone receptor isoforms in KLE and Hec50 endometrial cancer cells, adenoviral vectors encoding the genes for progesterone receptor isoforms A and B were created. The characteristic ability of cancer cells to grow independently of anchorage to the surrounding solid matrix was measured by counting colony formation on soft agar for 8 to 14 days. Cell proliferation in response to a time course of progestin treatment was tested with flow cytometry. Results: After treatment with a control vector without a progesterone receptor–encoding insert, no effect of progestin treatment on cell proliferation was found; after treatment with vectors encoding progesterone receptor isoform A or B, however, progestin treatment resulted in significant inhibition of cell growth. The anchorage-independent cell growth on soft agar assay showed that by 8 to 14 days the number of cell colonies was reduced by 50% relative to control preparations in the presence of progesterone receptor isoform A plus progestin (P< .0001, both Hec50 and KLE cell lines) and by 90% in the presence of progesterone receptor isoform B plus progestin (P< .0001, both Hec50 and KLE cell lines). Progestin treatment also resulted in a time-dependent reduction in cell proliferation as measured by flow cytometry. Although transfection with both progesterone receptor isoforms A and B reduced cell proliferation according to our assays, progesterone receptor isoform B caused a much more dramatic decrease in cell growth (P = .001, Hec50 cells; P< .0001, KLE cells). Conclusion: In poorly differentiated endometrial cancer cells that are resistant to progestin therapy, adenovirus-induced expressions of progesterone receptors A and B reestablish progestin control of endometrial cancer cell proliferation. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001;184:790-7.)
