Objective: The aim of the study was to analyze the proliferative response of the normal mammary gland to combination hormone replacement therapy with estrogen and progesterone in a murine model of early versus late postmenopausal states. Study Design: Ovariectomized mice were injected daily for up to 56 days with estrogen plus progesterone, starting at either 1 or 5 weeks after ovariectomy to simulate early and late menopausal periods, respectively. At various times after treatment, proliferation was analyzed by deoxyribonucleic acid histoautoradiography and whole-mount preparations. The induction of progesterone receptor by estrogen was also analyzed. To distinguish between estrogen- and progesterone-specific responses, we tested the effects of the antiprogesterone mifepristone (RU 486) and the antiestrogen ICI 182,780. Results: The acute response to estrogen-progesterone therapy in the early postmenopausal period resulted in duct-end enlargement, ductal side branching, alveolar bud formation, and a 100-fold increase in epithelial cell proliferation. This was caused by the dominant effect of progesterone acting through the progesterone receptor. In the late postmenopausal period the acute response produced only duct-end enlargement; the 100-fold increase in epithelial cell proliferation resulted from the dominant effect of estrogen. After long-term treatment, both early and late postmenopausal glands exhibited similar morphologic features and a 9-fold higher steady-state proliferation rate than was found in control-treated groups. Conclusions: Starting combined estrogen and progesterone hormone replacement therapy in either early or late postmenopause produced a persistent, steady-state 9-fold increase in epithelial cell proliferation, which could be a contributing factor to increased breast cancer risk. The acute response in the late postmenopausal period mimics the hormonal response of the pubertal mammary gland, which in rodents is the stage most susceptible to carcinogen-induced mammary tumorigenesis. These observations raise questions about increased susceptibility of the late postmenopausal gland to carcinogenesis and a role for hormone replacement therapy in the promotion of tumorigenesis. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001;184:340-9.)
