Objective: Fetal plasma angiotensin II levels are 10 times the levels found in adults. Despite these high levels, central injection of angiotensin II may stimulate fetal swallowing and increase fetal arterial blood pressure. We postulated that the high rate of spontaneous fetal swallowing and normal fetal pressor regulation may be dependent, in part, on central angiotensin II. In view of the potential dipsogenic role of both type 1 and type 2 angiotensin II receptors, we examined the central effect of the nonselective angiotensin II receptor antagonist saralasin on fetal swallowing and cardiovascular responses. Study Design: Six time-dated pregnant ewes and fetuses were chronically prepared with fetal vascular and intracerebroventricular catheters, electrocorticograms, and esophageal electromyogram electrodes and studied at 130 ± 1 days' gestation. After an initial 2-hour baseline period (0 to 2 hours), saralasin (1 mL, 64 μg) was injected intracerebroventricularly (2 to 4 hours). After 4 hours the dose of saralasin was repeated together with angiotensin II (1 mL, 6.4 μg), and the fetuses were monitored for a final 2 hours. Four fetuses also underwent an identical control study (on an alternate day) in which saralasin was replaced with artificial cerebrospinal fluid. Results: Blockade of central angiotensin II receptors by intracerebroventricular saralasin significantly reduced mean (± SEM) spontaneous fetal swallowing (1.3 ± 0.1 to 0.4 ± 0.1 swallows per minute; P< .001) but did not alter fetal mean blood pressure (50 ± 5 versus 56 ± 5 mm Hg). Intracerebroventricular angiotensin II, in the presence of saralasin, did not affect swallowing (0.6 ± 0.1 swallows per minute) or fetal blood pressure. In the control study, intracerebroventricular artificial cerebrospinal fluid did not change fetal swallowing (0.9 ± 0.1 versus 1.0 ± 0.1 swallows per minute), whereas intracerebroventricular angiotensin II significantly increased swallowing activity (1.0 ± 0.1 versus 2.0 ± 0.1 swallows per minute; P< .001) and fetal blood pressure (51 ± 2 to 59 ± 3 mm Hg; P = .003). Conclusions: Tonic activity of central angiotensin II receptor stimulation contributed to the high rate of basal ovine fetal swallowing but not fetal basal blood pressure. Angiotensin II–mediated fetal dipsogenic and pressor responses are a result of specific angiotensin II receptor binding in central brain regions. These results indicate that fetal exposure to angiotensin II antagonists or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors may have adverse effects on fetal and amniotic fluid homeostasis. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001;185: 828-33.)
