Objective: The purpose of this study was to determine the predictive ability of parameters of 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring for the development of preeclampsia or gestational hypertension in women who are already considered at risk for these disorders. Study Design: One hundred twenty-two pregnant women who were considered high risk for the development of preeclampsia underwent 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring between 18 and 30 weeks gestation, while their condition was normotensive according to routine mercury sphygmomanometry. One hundred sixty-four healthy primigravid women who were considered at usual risk for preeclampsia underwent the same tests as a parallel study. Routine blood pressure, awake and sleep average blood pressure, and 24-hour mean average blood pressure were entered into multiple logistic regression as predictors of either preeclampsia or gestational hypertension; significant variables were then tested by a series of receiver operator curves. Results: Eight percent of usual risk and 45% of high risk women experienced the development of preeclampsia or gestational hypertension. In both groups, the average routine mercury blood pressure and awake, sleeping, and 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring–derived blood pressure were significantly higher in women who later experienced the development of preeclampsia or gestational hypertension. In usual risk women, 24-hour systolic blood pressure of ≥115 mm Hg and sleeping systolic blood pressure of ≥106 mm Hg were predictive of later preeclampsia or gestational hypertension, but sensitivities were low (77% and 54%, respectively). In high risk women, sleeping diastolic blood pressure of ≥62 mm Hg and sleeping mean arterial pressure of ≥79 mm Hg were predictive of preeclampsia or gestational hypertension, but again sensitivities were low (70% and 65%, respectively). Conclusion: Awake and sleeping blood pressure are higher in midpregnancy in women who later experience the development of preeclampsia or gestational hypertension. Twenty-four–hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring provides a noninvasive method of selecting some of these women, but this test has a sensitivity no better than that of other predictive tests, even in women at high risk for preeclampsia. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001;185:618-22.)
