Objective: Unrecognized ureteral and bladder injury are a known source of morbidity and mortality in gynecologic surgery. The objective of this study was to determine the frequency that intraoperative cystoscopy during prolapse and incontinence procedures produced a change in intraoperative management to prevent ureteric and bladder injury. Study Design: This study reviewed the charts and operative reports of 235 cases of routine intraoperative cystoscopy during prolapse and incontinence surgery during a 2-year period in a tertiary care urogynecology unit. Demographic data and potential risk factors for intraoperative urinary tract injury were recorded. Cases that involved a change in management brought about by intraoperative cystoscopy with intravenous indigo carmine were compared with cases in which intraoperative cystoscopy was normal. Variables were compared with use of the Student t test and the χ2 test. Results: Of 235 cases, 11 were excluded. Of the 224 remaining cases, 12 (5.3%) underwent changes in intraoperative management as a result of cystoscopic findings. Eight cases involved ureteric blockage. Patients with abnormal cystoscopies did not differ from patients with normal intraoperative findings with regard to age, weight, parity, maximum grade of prolapse, estimated blood loss, or previous surgery. In 58% of patients with abnormal cystoscopies, there was no suspicion of technical difficulty on the basis of previous surgical history. Preoperative renal imaging did not predict cases with abnormal cystoscopy. There were no cases of complications caused by the intraoperative cystoscopy. Conclusion: Intraoperative cystoscopy with intravenous injection of indigo carmine is a safe technique that can detect otherwise undetected intraoperative compromise of the urinary tract during prolapse and incontinence surgery. It is recommended that cystoscopy be used liberally to reduced the frequency of serious sequelae from urinary tract injury. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001;185:1368-73.)
