OBJECTIVE: We previously reported that nicotine decreases leukocyte adhesion to uterine vascular endothelial cells in vivo under ischemic conditions in pregnant rabbits. To further investigate the mechanism of decreased leukocyte-endothelial adhesion by nicotine exposure, the effect of nicotine on endothelial cell intercellular adhesion molecule expression and neutrophil integrin expression of CD62L, CD11a, and CD11b were examined. STUDY DESIGN: Endothelial cells were isolated from human umbilical cord veins from normal pregnancies in nonsmoking women immediately after delivery. Neutrophils were isolated from healthy nonpregnant and nonsmoking female volunteers. First passage of endothelial cells and fresh isolated neutrophils were exposed to nicotine at different concentrations. Surface adhesion molecule expression of intercellular adhesion molecule on endothelial cells was determined by colorimetric assay. Neutrophil integrin expressions for CD62L, CD11a, and CD11b were determined by flow cytometry. Messenger RNA expression for intercellular adhesion molecule in endothelial cells was examined by reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction. RESULTS: Nicotine at a lower concentration of 0.01 μmol/L had no effect on endothelial cell surface intercellular adhesion molecule expression compared with controls (P = .614). Nicotine at a higher concentration of 10 μmol/L completely inhibited endothelial cell surface intercellular adhesion molecule-1 expression(P< .0001). At concentrations between 0.10 and 10 μmol/L, nicotine inhibited intercellular adhesion molecule expression in a dose-dependent manner. Messenger RNA expression of intercellular adhesion molecule in endothelial cells was not changed after exposure to nicotine. Decreased integrin expressions of CD62L, CD11a, and CD11b were observed on neutrophils after exposure to nicotine. CONCLUSION: Nicotine exerts inhibitory effects on both endothelial cell surface intercellular adhesion molecule expression and neutrophil integrin expressions of CD62L, CD11a, and CD11b in vitro. These in vitro effects of nicotine may relate to the clinical observation of reduced incidence of preeclampsia in women that smoke. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;186:551-6.)
