Objective: The purpose of this study was to determine whether there is a shift in the timing of eclampsia in relation to delivery and whether traditional symptoms precede impending postpartum eclampsia. Study Design: A multicenter analysis of data from patients with eclampsia from March 1996 through February 2001 at the University of Cincinnati, the University of Tennessee, Memphis, and Central Baptist Hospital, Lexington. Data were collected regarding the relationship of the patient's first seizure to delivery, prodromal symptoms, neuroimaging studies, use of magnesium sulfate, antihypertensive therapy, and follow-up medical care. The analysis focused on women who had late postpartum eclampsia. Results: During the study period, 89 patients were diagnosed with eclampsia. Twenty-nine women (33%) had postpartum eclampsia, of whom 23 women (79%) had late onset (>48 hours). Interestingly, only 5 of these 23 women (22%) had been previously diagnosed with preeclampsia. Twenty-one patients (91%) with late postpartum eclampsia had at least 1 prodromal symptom, and 12 patients (52%) had >1 symptom that heralded the seizure: 20 women (87%) had headache; 10 women (44%) had visual changes; 5 women (22%) had nausea or vomiting; and 2 women (9%) experienced epigastric pain. Only 7 of these 21 women (33%) sought care for their symptoms, of whom 6 women (86%) had clinical evidence of preeclampsia that was not considered by the treating physician. Among all patients with eclampsia, there were 7 cases of aspiration pneumonia, 3 cases of pulmonary edema, 3 cases of pleural effusion, 2 cases of disseminated intravascular coagulation, and no cases of maternal death. Conclusion: Current obstetric treatment in the United States has resulted in a shift of eclampsia toward the postpartum period, with most cases being seen as late post partum. To reduce the rate of late postpartum eclampsia, efforts should be directed to the education of the health care providers and patients regarding the importance of prompt reporting and evaluation of symptoms of preeclampsia during the postpartum period. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;186:1174-7.)
