Objective: Our purpose was to test the hypothesis that severe placental insufficiency leads to reductions in fetal urine production and amniotic fluid volume in late-gestation fetal sheep. Study Design: At 0.85 of gestation, chronically catheterized fetal sheep with ligated urachus were either embolized for 5 days by repeated injection of boluses of 15-μm microspheres into the common fetal umbilical artery until fetal arterial oxygen content was reduced by 50% (n = 6) or were infused with saline solution (n = 6). Amniotic fluid volume was measured daily before embolization by means of an indicator dilution technique and by drainage at autopsy. Fetal urine production, heart rate, and mean arterial blood pressure were measured continuously for 1 hour before embolization and 1 hour after embolization each day. Fetal arterial blood gases, oxygen content, electrolytes, and osmolality were also monitored. Results: Five days of placental insufficiency, which reduced fetal arterial oxygen content by 50% and arrested fetal growth, resulted in a reduced amniotic fluid volume without a reduction in fetal urine production. Compared with that of controls, amniotic fluid volume was reduced over the 5-day period by 547 ± 144 mL (−62%, P < .01). Amniotic fluid composition was also altered, with a significant increase in lactate and sodium concentrations and osmolality on days 4 to 5. On days 2 to 5, there was a progressive increase in amniotic fluid osmolality above that of controls, which paralleled the changes in amniotic fluid sodium concentration (P < .05). Fetuses became hypertensive on days 2 to 4 of embolization, although this response was attenuated by day 5. Conclusions: Chronic severe placental insufficiency caused a reduction in amniotic fluid volume not attributable to reduced fetal urine production. Changes in amniotic fluid composition induced by placental insufficiency suggest an excess intramembranous absorption of amniotic fluid water, in relation to solutes, into the fetal and maternal compartments, which may lead to the development of oligohydramnios. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;186:1076-84)
