Objective: Our purpose was to examine the frequency of significant intraoperative cystoscopic findings during major vaginal reconstructive and urogynecologic surgeries. Study Design: The records of 526 consecutive women who underwent routine cystoscopy with intravenous injection of indigo carmine at the time of their urogynecologic and major vaginal reconstructive procedures between January 1, 1997, and April 20, 2001, were reviewed. We determined the incidence of significant cystoscopic findings and their effect on intraoperative management. Two-tailed t tests and logistic regression analyses were used to compare characteristics between the groups with and without significant cystoscopic findings. Results: During the 526 operations, 26 significant findings (4.9%) were unsuspected before cystoscopy and 15 (2.9%) of these findings were operative injuries that required intervention. Seventy-nine subjects (15.0%) had no anti-incontinence operation performed. Of these patients, there was one partial ureteral obstruction from an anterior colporrhaphy (1.3%). Seven of 184 Burch procedures (3.8%) resulted in injuries to the lower urinary tract, of which 3 (1.6%) required intervention that were unrecognized before cystoscopy. Seven of the 15 cases resulting in changes in intraoperative management were caused by anterior colporrhaphy sutures (2.0% of all anterior colporrhaphies). There were no unrecognized injuries that caused morbidity after surgery. There were no significant differences between patients with abnormal and normal cystoscopic findings in regard to mean age, weight, parity, estimated blood loss, previous surgery, or previous incontinence surgeries. No complications or morbidity occurred as a direct result of intraoperative cystoscopy. Conclusion: Intraoperative cystoscopy with intravenous indigo carmine is a safe and effective way to detect injury of the lower urinary tract. Cystoscopy detected unsuspected operative injuries in 2.9%. In cases that did not involve anti-incontinence procedures, the rate of injury was 1.3%. With a significant rate of detection, cystoscopy allows for immediate recognition and easier repair of lower urinary tract injury, lowering the patient's risk for morbidity. Anterior colporrhaphy was the most common cause of unrecognized ureteral compromise. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;187:1466-72.)
