Objective: The purpose of this study was to determine whether treatment with the immune modulators dexamethasone or interleukin-10 prevents interleukin-1β-induced uterine contractions in a nonhuman primate model. Study Design: Thirteen chronically instrumented rhesus monkeys at 135 ± 1 days of gestation (term, 167 days) received one of three interventions: (1) intra-amniotic interleukin-1β (10 μg) infusion with maternal dexamethasone (1 mg/kg) intravenously every 6 hours for 1 day before interleukin-1β and for 2 days thereafter (n = 4), (2) intra-amniotic interleukin-1β infusion with maternal interleukin-10 (25 μg/kg) given intravenously and 100 μg interleukin-10 given intra-amniotically before the interleukin-1β and continued every 8 hours for 3 days (n = 5), and (3) intra-amniotic interleukin-1β administered alone (n = 5). Uterine activity was monitored continuously and quantified as the hourly contraction area (millimeters of mercury times seconds per hour) in all groups until delivery. Amniotic fluid was sampled for leukocyte counts and assayed for prostaglandins E2 and F2α, cytokines interleukin-1β, interleukin-6, interleukin-8, tumor necrosis factor-α, interleukin-10, and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist by specific assays. Maternal and fetal blood were assayed for cortisol, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, and estradiol. Results: Interleukin-1β infusion in the absence of immune modulators resulted in an increase in uterine activity and amniotic fluid proinflammatory cytokines, prostaglandins, and leukocytes. Dexamethasone and interleukin-10 treatment significantly reduced interleukin-1β-induced uterine contractility (P < .05) and amniotic fluid prostaglandins (P < .05) but not interleukin-8 or interleukin-1 receptor antagonist. Amniotic fluid interleukin-6 and maternal and fetal cortisol, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, and estradiol concentrations were reduced by dexamethasone (P < .05), whereas tumor necrosis factor-α levels and leukocyte counts were attenuated by interleukin-10 treatment (P < .05). An inverse relationship was noted between amniotic fluid interleukin-10 concentrations and interleukin-1β-induced uterine activity (r = −0.74, P < .05). Conclusion: Dexamethasone and interleukin-10 exert similar inhibitory effects on interleukin-1β-induced uterine activity, which appears to be mediated by a decrease in prostaglandin production. Reduced estrogen biosynthesis or suppression of tumor necrosis factor-α and leukocyte migration may contribute to the tocolytic actions of dexamethasone and interleukin-10, respectively. Dexamethasone and interleukin-10 are likely to be useful adjuncts in the treatment of preterm labor that is associated with inflammation or infection.Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;188:252-63.
