Objective: The study objective was to examine the neonatal outcome in pregnancies with early preterm premature rupture of the membranes (PPROM) who were managed expectantly despite the development of recurrent active genital herpes. Study Design: Pregnancies complicated by PPROM at ≤14;31 weeks' gestation that developed an active recurrent genital herpes lesion were collected. The latency time from herpes lesion development to delivery and the neonatal outcome were analyzed. A control group of patients with PPROM at ≤14;31 weeks' gestation with no herpes infection was also obtained. Results: A total of 29 patients were identified during the study period. The mean gestational age at herpes lesion development after PPROM was 28.7 weeks (range 24.6-31.0 weeks). The mean latency period from herpes development to delivery was 13.2 days (range 1-35 days). No cases of neonatal herpes developed in the delivered newborn infants and all neonatal cultures were negative (0 of 29 cases, 95% CI 0%-10.4%). Twelve newborn infants (41%) had major morbidity caused by prematurity and 3 of these (10.3%) died. There were no differences seen between the study cases and the control group. In the study, 15 of the 29 pregnancies were delivered beyond 30 weeks' gestation. If delivery had occurred on the day the herpes lesion developed, only 5 pregnancies would have been delivered beyond 30 weeks' gestation. Conclusion: On the basis of the 95% CI of these data, the maximum risk for development of a neonatal herpes infection in the face of PPROM and active recurrent genital herpes was 10.4%. This was equal to the mortality rate and was 75% lower than the major morbidity rate caused by prematurity. If delivery had occurred on the day the herpes lesions developed, on average, the neonates would have been nearly 2 weeks more premature, thereby potentially increasing the morbidity and mortality related to prematurity. These data concur with the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists consensus and expert opinion and would suggest that expectant management of PPROM at ≤14;31 weeks' gestation with active recurrent genital herpes is warranted. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;188:1551-5.)
