For more than four decades, geostationary weather satellites have been used successfully by NOAA´s National Weather Service for daily weather forecasting and for tracking storm events. At the same time, polar orbit systems, such as NOAA/AVHRR, SeaWIFS and Landsat TM, have provided valuable information about slowly varying features and processes in the open ocean and on land. However, coastal and estuarine applications of remote sensing require significantly finer temporal, spatial, and spectral resolution than open ocean studies. Current polar orbit satellites lack the temporal resolution, while present geostationary orbit satellites have limited spatial and spectral resolution. Geostationary satellites can provide images of clouds, ocean and land surfaces very frequently, since they are positioned above a selected point on the equator and continuously view the same one third of the Earth. However, in order to have the same angular velocity as the Earth, they must be located in an orbit 23,000 miles above the equator, which limits their spatial resolution. NOAA, with support from NASA and the Navy, is developing GOES-R, a geostationary satellite. GOES-R will include a Hyperspectral Environmental Suite for Coastal Waters (HES-CW) and atmospheric sounding sensors which should provide the resolution levels required for coastal and estuarine observations. To achieve this, full use will be made of the fact that a geostationary platform offers a very high sampling frequency and long integration times, allowing for high signal-to-noise (S/N) ratios. Thus, useful trade-offs can be made between S/N, number of spectral bands, and sampling frequency, even though the spatial resolution is constrained to 150-300 m at the equator by system design considerations, such as mirror size, stability and pointing of the spacecraft. The objective of this paper is to illustrate coastal and estuarine resolution requirements for typical coastal features and processes such as: 1) chlorophyll concentration and coastal productivity, 2) harmful algal blooms and eutrophication, 3) current measurement by feature tracking, 4) oil slick drift and capture by estuarine fronts, 5) dynamic behavior of turbidity plumes and ocean-dumped waste, 6) propagation of internal waves on the continental sh- elf, 7) ice cover for coastal shipping, 8) coastal flooding and other catastrophic events, and 9) coastal ecosystem and wetland habitat changes. These resolution requirements are then compared to current GOES-R specifications.
