OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to determine whether suture placement through the bladder during closure of the vaginal cuff at the time of transabdominal hysterectomy is associated with formation of postoperative vesicovaginal fistula. STUDY DESIGN: Virgin female New Zealand White rabbits were used to perform this study. The study protocol was approved by the institutional Animal Use and Care Committee. Animals were housed and maintained in the animal facilities at the University of Mississippi Medical Center according to appropriate guidelines. Thirty-two animals were randomized into two groups at a 2:1 ratio. All animals underwent transabdominal hysterectomy. Animals in group 1 (n = 21) had a figure-of-eight suture placed through the anterior vaginal cuff and intentionally into the bladder. Animals in group 2 (n = 11) were treated in an identical manner but care was taken to exclude the bladder when the suture was placed into the anterior vaginal cuff. Animals were put to death, and necropsy was performed 28 days after surgery. The bladder and vagina of each animal were harvested en bloc. Evidence of a fistula between the bladder and vagina was then determined in three distinct ways. Infant formula was infused into the bladder through a urethral catheter, and the vagina was inspected for leakage. Saline solution tinted with methylene blue was used in the same manner. Last, air was injected through the catheter into the bladder with the en bloc vagina and bladder preparation submerged in water. The vagina was observed for air leakage manifest by bubble formation. RESULTS: The two groups were comparable in regard to weight gain, intraoperative complications, and postoperative complications. One animal in each group died. Neither had a surgical complication directly related to the suture placement. During inspection of the vagina and bladder no animal was noted to have a vesicovaginal fistula. CONCLUSIONS: A suture placed through the bladder during closure of the vaginal cuff after transabdominal hysterectomy, as an isolated event, does not appear to be associated with formation of postoperative vesicovaginal fistula.(Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;177:304)
