OBJECTIVE: We wished to determine the impact of managed health care on resident education in obstetrics and gynecology. STUDY DESIGN: A multiquestion survey was mailed to program directors of the 267 obstetrics-gynecology resident training programs in the United States. The questions ascertained departmental philosophy regarding the role of obstetrician-gynecologists as primary care versus specialist physicians, the extent of involvement with managed health care companies, educational curriculum content, the effect of managed care on patient volume, faculty time available for resident teaching, and the effect of managed care on resident education. RESULTS: Completed surveys were received from 210 (79%) program directors. One hundred twenty-six (63%) program directors responded that obstetrician-gynecologists should be primary care physicians for women, and 120 (60%) believed that the role of subspecialists will be reduced in the near future. In 1996, 177 (94%) programs had managed care contracts; many (57%) had >20 contracts. All programs participate with other specialties to teach primary care to their residents. One hundred twelve (59%) programs have had a decrease in patient volume, prompting 90 (45%) programs to increase their number of teaching sites. Of concern, 54 (26%) program directors noted that managed care companies discourage but do not restrict resident participation in the care and treatment of managed care patients, and 41 (20%) programs had some restrictions placed on such resident involvement. Budgetary constraints have decreased resources to 97 (47%) programs and threaten the time available for faculty teaching. CONCLUSIONS: Managed health care is having an effect on many resident teaching programs. Program directors are integrating managed care concepts into the educational curriculum and are negotiating with managed care organizations to involve residents in the care and treatment of managed care patients. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;178:1157-64.)
