OBJECTIVE: Continent urinary diversions have become popular among gynecologic oncologists. Much information has been gained concerning the complications and current management of patients with continent ileocolonic reservoirs. The high mortality rate associated with reoperation has led clinicians to adopt a trend toward conservative means of management. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the applicability of conservative management of complications related to the creation of the continent ileocolonic reservoir Miami pouch.
STUDY DESIGN: Patients who underwent creation of the Miami pouch at the Division of Gynecologic Oncology, University of Miami School of Medicine, since 1988 have been included in this study. Management of complications, with particular emphasis on the conservative treatment, has been reviewed in detail for each patient. Open surgery and conservative treatment have been compared.
RESULTS: Seventy-seven patients underwent creation of the Miami pouch from February 1988 to September 1997. Sixty (77.9%) patients were affected by recurrent cervical cancer; 72 (93.5%) were previously radiated. The perioperative mortality rate was 11.7% (9 patients). Six of these patients died as a result of sepsis; all of them underwent reoperation at least once. The most common urinary complications were ureteral stricture or obstruction (22.1%), difficult catheterization (19.5%), and pyelonephritis (13%). Conservative management strategies used for these complications included percutaneous nephrostomy, stent placement, balloon dilatation, radiologically (ultrasonography, fluoroscopy, computed tomography) guided placement of catheters, and antibiotic treatment. Eighty percent of the complications associated with the ileocolonic reservoir were resolved with conservative treatment, whereas 16.9% required surgical revision.
CONCLUSION: On the basis of these findings, conservative management of urinary reservoir complications should always be considered before surgical intervention is attempted. The exact time to engage in open revision should be individualized on the basis of the clinical condition of each patient. It is our belief that the conservative approach should be instituted whenever possible but surgical intervention not be delayed when absolutely indicated. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:343-8.)

