OBJECTIVE: This study was designed to show whether the overexpression of relaxin in the decidua of patients with preterm premature rupture of the membranes is independent of or a consequence of chorioamnionitis.
STUDY DESIGN: Two experiments were conducted. In the first experiment fetal membranes and decidua were collected from patients with preterm premature rupture of the membranes (n = 17) or preterm labor (n = 17) and were divided according to their degree of histologic infection. Messenger ribonucleic acid was isolated from the tissues and quantitative, sequential Northern analyses were carried out for the expression of human relaxin, interleukin-1β, interleukin-6, and interleukin-8. The second experiment was aimed at increasing the numbers of messenger ribonucleic acid preparations in the two extreme categories, uninfected and severely infected tissues, with preterm premature rupture of the membranes and preterm labor. Some samples of messenger ribonucleic acid from the first experiment were rerun with the Northern analyses in the second experiment. These repeat samples showed no statistical differences in the results run at different times. Therefore the data from the respective groups of patients in both experiments were pooled for statistical analysis.
RESULTS: In both the first experiment and in the pooled data of the two experiments the expression of the relaxin genes was significantly greater (P< .005) in the tissues from patients with preterm premature rupture of the membranes compared with those with preterm labor, in the absence of infection. No effect of the level of infection on the expression of relaxin was noted. In contrast, interleukin-6 gene expression was significantly increased (P< .05) in severely infected tissues, which was independent of whether the delivery was from preterm premature rupture of the membranes or preterm labor. The expression of the interleukin-1β and interleukin-8 genes were only marginally increased even in severe infection. Marked patient variability in expression of the interleukin genes, especially in severe infection, was noted.
CONCLUSION: A relaxin-mediated pathway that leads to preterm premature rupture of the membranes may exist independent of infection. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:126-34.)

