OBJECTIVE: γ-Glutamyl transpeptidase activity has been shown to be essential for the nephrotoxicity of cisplatin. The purpose of this study was to determine whether expression of γ-glutamyl transpeptidase in ovarian carcinomas is necessary for the antitumor effect of cisplatin.
STUDY DESIGN: Tumor tissue from 18 patients with stage III or IV ovarian serous papillary carcinoma or poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma was analyzed for expression of γ-glutamyl transpeptidase by histochemical or immunohistochemical staining. Response to cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy was evaluated on the basis of clinical response, progression-free interval, and survival.
RESULTS: γ-Glutamyl transpeptidase expression in the tumors ranged from 0% to 100% of the tumor cells γ-glutamyl transpeptidase positive. Patient survival ranged from 15 months to 9 years. Twelve of the 18 patients had a complete response to the initial course of cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy. There was no statistically significant correlation between either response or time to relapse and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase expression. However, there was a correlation between high levels of γ-glutamyl transpeptidase in the tumor and acute ototoxicity in patients treated with cisplatin. Expression of high levels of γ-glutamyl transpeptidase in the tumor was also found to be associated with shorter patient survival, suggesting that γ-glutamyl transpeptidase might have a role in resistance to drugs used in second- and third-line therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of γ-glutamyl transpeptidase in ovarian serous papillary or poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas is not necessary for the antitumor activity of cisplatin. A correlation was found between high levels of γ-glutamyl transpeptidase in the tumor and both increased ototoxicity from cisplatin and decreased patient survival. These data suggest that administering an inhibitor of γ-glutamyl transpeptidase activity to block the nephrotoxicity of cisplatin would not interfere with its therapeutic effect. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:363-7.)

