OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether the intrauterine instillation of saline solution during transvaginal ultrasonographic imaging (hydrosonography) improves the diagnostic accuracy in detecting intrauterine abnormalities determined by direct visualization of the intrauterine cavity with either hysteroscopy or after hysterectomy.
STUDY DESIGN: This study was a prospective, blinded study of 39 women referred with the diagnosis of abnormal uterine bleeding after failing medical management. A routine vaginal probe ultrasonographic examination was followed by a blinded transvaginal hydrosonography in patients proceeding to either hysteroscopy or hysterectomy.
RESULTS: Twelve of the 39 patients had masses that impinged on the intrauterine cavity at hysteroscopy or hysterectomy. In 4 of the 12 patients with confirmed masses, an intrauterine lesion was detected by hydrosonography that was not seen on routine vaginal probe ultrasonography. In no case was an intrauterine mass detected by the hysteroscopy or after hysterectomy when hydrosonography indicated a normal intrauterine cavity. In 4 cases hydrosonography suggested that masses were present that were not confirmed at direct visualization. Although hydrosonography always recognized when intracavitary pathologic conditions existed in a patient, hydrosonography sometimes underestimated the number of intracavitary lesions present.
CONCLUSIONS: Hydrosonography is a simple, minimally invasive, and effective tool to use in the evaluation of patients with abnormal uterine bleeding who have not responded to medical treatment. In no case did hydrosonography fail to indicate when pathologic conditions existed in a given patient, and a normal hydrosonography always indicated a normal intrauterine cavity at hysteroscopy or after hysterectomy. For these reasons hydrosonography is a sensitive tool to triage women with abnormal uterine bleeding to operative or conservative management. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:292-8.)

