OBJECTIVE: Our purpose in these studies was to determine the expression and cellular localization of the parathyroid hormone/parathyroid hormone–related protein receptor in the human uteroplacental unit.
STUDY DESIGN: Human uteroplacental tissues were obtained and ribonucleic acid was extracted. Reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction was performed with use of primers for both the parathyroid hormone/parathyroid hormone–related protein receptor and human phosphoglyceraldehyde dehydrogenase. Ethidium bromide–stained gels and Southern blots were evaluated, and polymerase chain reaction fragments were sequenced. For immunohistochemistry, slides were incubated with a newly developed antibody (3D1.1) specific for the parathyroid hormone/parathyroid hormone–related protein receptor, and bound monoclonal antibody was detected by use of the avidin-biotin technique.
RESULTS: Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction gels and blots showed that receptor messenger ribonucleic acid was present in choriodecidua, placenta, and myometrium. Sequence analysis revealed complete identity of the receptor product and the known nucleotide sequence in the receptor. There was intense receptor staining of the myometrial smooth muscle as well as staining of the endothelium and smooth muscle of the associated vasculature. In umbilical cord immunoreactive receptor was found in the vascular endothelium and vascular smooth muscle cells and in stromal cells. In choriodecidua receptor was found in chorionic trophoblasts and decidualized endometrial stromal cells. In all tissues immunostaining was specific, as evidenced by the blocking of staining after addition of receptor peptide to the antibody (absorbed controls).
CONCLUSION: The parathyroid hormone/parathyroid hormone–related protein receptor is widely expressed in the human uteroplacental unit. The cellular localizations of the receptor in smooth muscle reflect the ability of parathyroid hormone–related protein to relax both uterine and vascular smooth muscle. The presence of novel autocrine and paracrine systems in the human uteroplacental unit is suggested by the finding that the same cells or adjacent cells produce both parathyroid hormone–related protein and its receptor. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:321-9.)

