Objective: Retinoids are a class of compounds that are structurally related to vitamin A and have been found to be effective in the prevention and treatment of cervical cancer. To investigate whether enhanced immunogenicity might be responsible for such efficacy, we evaluated the effects of retinoic acid on the expression of major histocompatibility complex class I and class II and intercellular adhesion molecule ICAM-1 in human cervical carcinoma cell lines. Study Design: The expression of surface antigens (major histocompatibility complex class I and class II and ICAM-1) was evaluated by fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis in 3 human cervical carcinoma cell lines after exposure to therapeutic doses of retinoic acid. In addition, the effects on human leukocyte antigen class I messenger ribonucleic acid expression were also evaluated by Northern blot analysis after such treatment. Results: CaSki, SiHa, and HT-3 cervical cancer cells expressed variable levels of major histocompatibility complex class I and ICAM-1 antigens, whereas class II surface antigens were not detectable. Exposure to therapeutic doses of retinoic acid were able to significantly increase the expression of major histocompatibility complex class I and ICAM-1 antigens in all the cell lines when compared with untreated tumor cells but were not able to induce the expression of class II surface human leukocyte antigens. Northern blot analysis showed that for major histocompatibility complex class I molecules such up-regulation was the result of an increased expression at the transcriptional level of major histocompatibility complex class I messenger ribonucleic acid. Conclusions: These data indicate that retinoic acid increases the expression of immunologically important surface antigens, suggesting that the efficacy of retinoic acid in the treatment of cervical cancer may be, at least in part, the result of immunologic modulation. Such findings support additional clinical research investigating the use of retinoids for the treatment of cervical cancer. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:1020-5.)
