Objective: Adhesion molecules, such as vascular cell adhesion molecule 1, are known to be increased in the serum of patients with preeclampsia, indicating that these molecules are possible markers of endothelial cell activation. We investigated the influence of serum from women with preeclampsia on the expression of adhesion molecules by cultured endothelial cells. Study Design: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells were cultured in Ham/Iscove modified Dulbecco’s medium containing 20% pooled human serum, l -glutamine (200 mmol/L), penicillin, and streptomycin. We stimulated these cells for 24 hours with sera from patients with preeclampsia and then determined the levels of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1, intercellular cell adhesion molecule 1, E-selectin, and P-selectin in the supernatant and in the maternal serum by means of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. These results were compared with those of sera obtained from normotensive pregnant and nonpregnant women. In addition, the expressions of these adhesion molecules on the endothelial surface were determined by immunofluo-rescence microscopy. Results: Only for vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 and E-selectin were elevated plasma levels found in hypertensive patients, whereas intercellular cell adhesion molecule 1 and P-selectin showed similar plasma levels in all the patients. No differences in the levels of the adhesion molecules were found between the supernatants of endothelial cell cultures after stimulation with sera from patients with preeclampsia and those after stimulation with normotensive control sera. In contrast, with immunofluorescence microscopy we could detect higher amounts of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1, intercellular cell adhesion molecule 1, and E-selectin on the endothelial surface after stimulation with sera from women with preeclampsia. Conclusion: Although vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 and E-selectin were elevated in maternal serum samples from women with preeclampsia and on the endothelial surface after stimulation with such sera, there were no detectable increases in the levels of both of these adhesion molecules in the supernatant of cultured endothelial cells. We therefore assume that sera from women with preeclampsia may cause endothelial cell activation. Because we could not detect elevated concentrations of any of the investigated adhesion molecules in the supernatant of endothelial cells, we believe that factors other than sera from women with preeclampsia seem to play a major role in the release of soluble forms of adhesion molecules from the endothelial membrane. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:68-72.)
