Objective: Potassium channel activation has been shown to decrease uterine tone and is a target for inhibition of uterine activity in the treatment of preterm labor. In addition, potassium channel activation also appears to be involved in oocyte maturation. The specific potassium channels responsible for these channel currents have not been identified but are known to be responsive to such agents as pinacidil and to be inhibited by glibenclamide. These findings suggest the presence of an adenosine triphosphate–sensitive potassium channel that is a complex of a weak inwardly rectifying potassium channel subunit 6.1 or 6.2 and sulfonylurea-binding regulatory subunit 1 or 2. Study Design: The technique of reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction was used to detect the presence of messenger ribonucleic acid for sulfonylurea-binding regulatory subunit 1 and 2 and weak inwardly rectifying potassium channel subunit 6.1 and 6.2 in the ovary and myometrium of the pregnant rat. In situ hybridization histochemical analysis was used to identify the specific cell types expressing each messenger ribonucleic acid. Results: Reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction analysis found expression of messenger ribonucleic acid for sulfonylurea-binding regulatory subunits 1 and 2B and messenger ribonucleic acid for weak inwardly rectifying potassium channel subunit 6.1 in rat myometrium and ovary during gestation. There was no evidence for expression of weak inwardly rectifying potassium channel subunit 6.2 messenger ribonucleic acid in the ovary or the myometrium of the pregnant rat. In situ hybridization histochemical examination localized expression of messenger ribonucleic acid for sulfonylurea-binding regulatory subunit 2B and messenger ribonucleic acid for weak inwardly rectifying potassium channel subunit 6.1 to uterine myocytes and granulosa cells of the corpus luteum. The cells expressing sulfonylurea-binding regulatory subunit 1 messenger ribonucleic acid could not be identified because of the scarcity of this messenger ribonucleic acid. Messenger ribonucleic acid for sulfonylurea-binding regulatory subunit 1, messenger ribonucleic acid for sulfonylurea-binding regulatory subunit 2B, and messenger ribonucleic acid for weak inwardly rectifying potassium channel subunit 6.1 were also observed in the placenta by in situ hybridization histochemical examination. Conclusion: The results suggest that the major adenosine triphosphate–sensitive potassium channel expressed in the myometrium and the corpus luteum during pregnancy is a complex of sulfonylurea-binding regulatory subunit 2B and weak inwardly rectifying potassium channel subunit 6.1. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:1121-6.)
