Objective: We sought to determine the effect of antenatal betamethasone exposure on the incidence of early onset neonatal sepsis in patients with preterm premature rupture of membranes. Study Design: We performed a nonconcurrent prospective analysis of infants delivered between 24 and 34 weeks’ gestation after preterm premature rupture of membranes. Patients with preterm premature rupture of membranes were categorized into 3 groups on the basis of the following betamethasone exposures: (1) none (control subjects), (2) two 12-mg doses in a 24-hour interval on admission (single course), and (3) weekly administration after the initial single course (multiple courses). All included patients received prophylactic antibiotics for group B streptococci. Discrete data were tested for significance with the χ2 test. Continuous data were tested for significance with an analysis of variance. Multiple logistic regression analysis was performed to determine the confounding effect of the multiple variables that were considered risk factors for early-onset neonatal sepsis. All P values of < .05 were considered significant. Results: Three hundred seventy-four patients with preterm premature rupture of membranes were included, 203 of whom were evaluated in the control group, 99 in the single-course group, and 72 in the group receiving multiple courses of betamethasone. Early-onset neonatal sepsis was significantly associated with multiple courses of corticosteroids (P< .001) and gestational age (P = .002). Multiple courses of antenatal betamethasone were significantly associated with chorioamnionitis (P = .004) and endometritis (P = .004). Single-course corticosteroid administration was not significantly associated with any maternal or neonatal infectious complications. Conclusions: Multiple courses of antenatal betamethasone administered to patients with preterm premature rupture of membranes is associated with an increased risk of early-onset neonatal sepsis development. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999;181:320-7.)
