Objective: The purpose of this study was to determine the factors that must be considered for appropriate counseling of patients with high-order multiple gestations. Study Design: A retrospective chart review was carried out from all high-order multiple gestations that were managed by a single perinatology group from February 1993–June 1998. Twin pregnancies that did not result from fetal reduction procedures were used as a control group. Results: Clinical outcome data were analyzed from 9 quadruplet, 25 triplet, 19 reduced twin, and 24 nonreduced twin pregnancies. Women with quadruplet pregnancies were admitted more frequently at an early gestational age, the infants were delivered earlier, and the maternal and neonatal hospital days were longer than for triplet and reduced and nonreduced twin gestations. Triplet pregnancies had an earlier gestational age at delivery (32.3 vs 34.2 weeks), a higher incidence of preterm labor (87% vs 68%), and a higher percentage of neonatal intensive care unit admissions (94% vs 59%) than reduced twin gestations. Reduced twins were hospitalized longer (16.4 vs 9.8 days), were delivered earlier (34.2 vs 36.2 weeks), had a higher incidence of preterm labor (68% vs 29%), and had a greater percentage of neonatal intensive care unit admissions (59% vs 21%), a greater percentage of birth weight <1500 g, and a greater frequency of respiratory distress syndrome (16% vs 2%) than nonreduced twins. There was no difference in neonatal survival and neurologic morbidity when all groups were compared. Conclusion: Although early delivery and prolonged (maternal and neonatal) hospitalization were common with quadruplets and triplets, maternal and neonatal outcomes were excellent. The decision for reduction from triplets to twins may not necessarily change pregnancy outcome but should still be discussed as an option for the parents. Continued efforts need to be made to reduce the overall number of iatrogenic high-order multiple gestations. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999;181:253-9.)
