Objective: The mechanical stability of the genitourinary tract is dependent on intact collagen fibers that support the bladder neck, urethra, and pelvic organs. We hypothesize that genetic differences in collagen metabolism may contribute to stress urinary incontinence. Because sex hormones have substantial influence on the female lower urinary tract throughout adult life, we investigated the gene expression of vaginal tissue of women with stress incontinence compared with women with no stress incontinence in the proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle. Study Design: Quantitative competitive polymerase chain reaction was used to verify that the gene expressions were similar between periurethral vaginal tissue and pelvic ligamentous tissue. Labeled complementary RNA was obtained from periurethral vaginal tissue in five pairs of age- and menstrual phase-matched, premenopausal women with and without stress urinary incontinence. The vaginal tissues were then hybridized on HuGeneFL arrays that contained probes representing 6800 full-length human genes. The Student t test and Mann-Whitney ranking were used independently to select candidates with probability values <.05. Hierarchical clustering analysis was performed on the selected candidates to assess the ability of these genes to discriminate between normal and affected individuals. Results: Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 and estrogen receptor-α messenger RNA expressions were found to be similar between uterosacral ligament and periurethral vaginal tissue in six participants. Of the 90 candidate genes that were identified, 62 genes were up-regulated and 28 were down-regulated in the stress urinary incontinence group. Genes that were involved in extracellular matrix activity in the up-regulated group include transforming growth factor-β3, laminin, and collagen type VI. Down-regulated genes that may participate in collagen metabolism include laminin-related protein, collagen XVII, serine/threonine protein kinase, type II interleukin-1 receptor, and platelet-derived growth factor-associated protein. Conclusion: In this preliminary study, we identified differential gene expressions that may contribute to extracellular matrix remodeling in pelvic tissue from women with stress urinary incontinence in the proliferative phase versus continent control subjects. The alteration in expression of these candidate genes suggests that they should be targets for further investigation. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;189:89-97.)
