Objective: We investigated the association between amniotic fluid levels of human brain natriuretic peptide, endothelin-1, and abnormal amniotic fluid volume in monochorionic twins with and without chronic twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Study Design: Amniotic fluid and fetal blood samples were obtained in utero or at cesarean delivery from monochorionic twins with (n = 20) or without chronic twin-twin transfusion syndrome (n = 10). Concentrations of atrial natriuretic peptide, human brain natriuretic peptide, and endothelin-1 (in picograms per milliliters) were determined by radioimmunoassay. Results: The amniotic fluid concentrations of human brain natriuretic peptide (P< .001) and endothelin-1 (P< .001) in the recipient fetuses were higher than the donor twins but were similar in the twins with no twin-twin transfusion syndrome. In the donor twins, amniotic fluid concentrations of human brain natriuretic peptide (P< .001) and endothelin-1 (P< .001) were lower than the twin pairs with no twin-twin transfusion syndrome. In both chronic twin-twin transfusion syndrome fetuses (P< .01) and fetuses with no twin-twin transfusion syndrome (P< .001), the amniotic fluid concentrations of human brain natriuretic peptide were high, although the concentrations of the endothelin-1 were lower than the fetal plasma concentrations. A positive association was present between amniotic fluid levels of human brain natriuretic peptide and endothelin-1 (R2 = 0.51, P< .001, n = 60). Amniotic fluid human brain natriuretic peptide (r = 0.67, P< .001) and endothelin-1 (r = 0.57, P< .01) levels of the recipient twins correlated with the amniotic fluid index. Conclusion: These data suggest that amniotic fluid concentrations of human brain natriuretic peptide and endothelin-1 were highest in the twins with polyhydramnios and lowest in the twins with oligohydramnios, which suggests the importance of these hormones in the regulation of amniotic fluid volume. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;189:189-94.)
