Objective
This study was undertaken to describe outcomes of a technique of vaginal paravaginal repair that used AlloDerm graft (LifeCell, Branchburg, NJ) in women with recurrent stage II or with primary or recurrent stage III/IV anterior vaginal wall prolapse.
Study design
This was an observational study. Thirty-three women underwent a vaginal paravaginal repair using AlloDerm graft. Anterior vaginal wall prolapse was staged using the pelvic organ prolapse quantification system preoperatively and every 6 months after surgery. Recurrence of prolapse, changes in functional status (urinary symptoms, prolapse symptoms, and sexual activity), and complications were recorded. Objective failure was defined as recurrent anterior vaginal wall prolapse, stage II or greater, and subjective failure as symptomatic recurrent anterior vaginal wall prolapse. Life-table analysis evaluated objective and subjective failure. Risk factors for recurrent anterior vaginal wall prolapse were evaluated.
Results
The mean age was 65.2 years and 93% of the women were white. Preoperatively, 6 women had recurrent stage II, 24 women had stage III, and 3 women had stage IV anterior vaginal wall prolapse. The median length of follow-up was 18 months. Postoperatively, 12 women had asymptomatic stage II anterior vaginal wall prolapse (not beyond the hymen) develop, and 1 woman had symptomatic stage II prolapse develop. Thus, there were 13 (41%) objective failures and 1 (3%) subjective failure. Life-table analysis demonstrated the cumulative probability of an objective failure was 0.24 at 1 year and 0.50 at 2, 3, and 4 years. The cumulative probability of a subjective failure was 0.00 at 1 and 2 years and 0.11 at 3 and 4 years. No risk factors for objective failure were identified. Voiding complaints resolved in 11 of 14 (79%) women (P = .004), incontinence symptoms resolved in 17 of 19 (89%) women (P<.001), and urgency symptoms resolved in 20 of 23 (87%) women (P<.001) (all two-tailed Fisher exact test). Twenty-one women (64%) were sexually active, and none complained of postoperative dyspareunia. Complications included 1 case of febrile morbidity, 1 cystotomy, and 1 anterior wall breakdown secondary to hematoma formation caused by heparin therapy. No other erosions or rejections were seen.
Conclusion
Vaginal paravaginal repair with AlloDerm graft in women with recurrent stage II or stage III/IV anterior vaginal wall prolapse is safe and has good subjective but only fair objective success within the first 2 years.

