Objective
The purpose of this study was to provide an updated profile of clerkship directors and third-year clerkships for Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology at US and Canadian medical schools.
Study design
All 142 accredited medical schools in the US and Canada were contacted to identify the individual(s) responsible for third-year medical education in Obstetrics and Gynecology. Additional clerkship sites (n = 10) were identified using the Association of Professors in Gynecology and Obstetrics' (APGO) list of current members self-identified as clerkship directors. Written surveys were mailed to the individuals identified above. The survey included questions about demographic and academic profiles, 11 attitude statements, as well as potential interest in a national organization of clerkship directors under APGO and interest in the creation of web-based resources specifically for clerkship directors.
Results
One hundred twenty-three (81%) responses were received. Demographic and academic characteristics of clerkship directors were similar to those published 13 (1) and 6 (2) years ago, except that the proportion of female clerkship directors has steadily increased (20% in 1989 [1], 25% in 1994 [2], and 44% in 2000, P< .0001). Thirty-five percent of departments have a specialized division of medical education, and 21% of respondents stated that their affiliated medical school had a formal multidisciplinary women's health care curriculum. Eighty-nine percent of respondents felt that their job as clerkship director was personally fulfilling. Eighty- nine percent supported a national organization of clerkship directors under APGO and the majority supported other activities specific for clerkship directors, including web-based resources.
Conclusion
The profiles of obstetrics and gynecology clerkships and clerkship directors in the US and Canada have remained relatively stable over the last 13 years. However, the proportion of female clerkship directors continues to increase. Interest in more organized activities specifically for clerkship directors and web-based resources is high.

