Objective
The purpose of this study was to determine the immunoreactivity of selected structural proteins in the preterm and near-term ovine fetal brain and the response to intermittent umbilical cord occlusion as a measure of altered cellular growth. The intermediate filament proteins nestin, vimentin, and glial fibrillary acidic protein was used as markers for astroglial maturation and astrogliosis, and myelin basic protein as a marker for oligodendrocytes and myelin formation.
Study design
Fetal sheep (control and experimental groups at 0.75 and 0.90 of gestation) were studied over 4 days; umbilical cord occlusion was performed in the experimental group by complete inflation of an occluder cuff for 90 seconds every 30 minutes for 3 to 5 hours each day. Animals were then killed, and the fetal brain was perfusion fixed and processed for immunohistologic examination of the gray and white matter. Immunoreactivity was quantified with an image analysis system and expressed as the fractional area positive stain for each protein.
Results
In both preterm and near-term animal groups, umbilical cord occlusion caused a large decline in arterial Po2 (to approximately 7 mm Hg), a modest decline in pH (to approximately 7.30), and a modest rise in Pco2 (to approximately 61 mm Hg; all P< .01), with a return to control values after the occluder release and no cumulative acidosis over each day of study. Vimentin and glial fibrillary acidic protein immunoreactivity showed reciprocal changes, with vimentin decreased and glial fibrillary acidic protein increased in both the gray and white matter of the control group from 0.75 to 0.90 of gestation, which can be attributed to the transition of radial glia into mature astrocytes. Myelin basic protein immunoreactivity increased approximately 3-fold in the white matter of the control group with advancing gestation, which likely reflected active oligodendrocyte differentiation and increased myelination at this time of development. Intermittent umbilical cord occlusion over 4 days resulted in an approximately 60% decrease in nestin, vimentin, and glial fibrillary acidic protein immunoreactivity, which was qualitatively similar for both the gray and white matter and likely indicative of altered protein synthesis and/or degradation, but only in the preterm group and with no change in myelin basic protein immunoreactivity.
Conclusion
There is considerable change in the immunoreactivity of structural proteins within the ovine fetal brain over the latter part of gestation and consistent with a high rate of protein turnover, as previously reported. Intermittent umbilical cord occlusion as studied with minimal evidence for necrotic cell injury appears capable of altering selected protein synthesis/degradation, more so in younger animals when protein turnover is higher, which might then impact on the brain's development.

