Objective
Eighty percent of human ovarian and endometrial cancers express receptors for luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone (LHRH-R). These receptors can be used for targeted chemotherapy with agents such as AN-152, in which doxorubicin is linked to analog [D-Lys6]-LHRH. Direct receptor-mediated antiproliferative effects of AN-152 have been shown in vitro and in vivo. In LHRH-R positive cell lines, AN-152 was more effective than doxorubicin at equimolar concentrations. This study was designed to investigate the mechanism of action of AN-512 in ovarian and endometrial cancer cells in vitro.
Study design
Three ovarian (SKOV-3, NIH:OVCAR-3, EFO-21) and 2 endometrial carcinoma cell lines (Ishikawa, HEC-1A) were evaluated for doxorubicin- or AN-152–induced apoptosis. Internalization and cytoplasmic release of AN-152 was monitored by confocal laser scanning microscopy and inhibited by chloroquine. Cleavage of doxorubicin from AN-152 was inhibited by carboxylesterase inhibitor, diisopropyl fluorophosphate (DFP). The surface expression of multidrug resistance-1 (MDR-1) gene product P-glycoprotein (Pgp) was measured by flow cytometry.
Results
Induction of apoptosis by AN-152 in LHRH-R positive Ishikawa, HEC-1A, EFO-21, and NIH:OVCAR-3 cells was significantly higher than that induced by doxorubicin, whereas the percentage of apoptotic cells in LHRH-R negative SKOV-3 was higher after treatment with doxorubicin. In EFO-21 cells, apoptosis induced by AN-152 was inhibited by pretreatment with chloroquine. Pretreatment with DFP increased AN-152–induced apoptosis in LHRH-R positive cells and reduced apoptosis in LHRH-R negative SKOV-3. Both AN-152 and doxorubicin induced surface expression of MDR-1 gene product Pgp, but the effect of AN-152 was smaller than that of doxorubicin. Pgp surface expression induced by AN-152 was inhibited by pretreatment with DFP.
Conclusion
AN-152 is internalized through the LHRH-R and induces apoptosis in LHRH-R–positive human ovarian and endometrial cancer cell lines without activating the MDR-1 efflux pump system. The efficacy and specificity of AN-152 is inversely correlated with carboxylesterase activity.

