Objective
Forty-six percent of third-year medical students at the University of Alberta rated labor and delivery nurses as a negative influence on their obstetrics and gynecology rotation. We hypothesized that the nurses would have mostly negative opinions toward students and their education.
Study design
Labor and delivery nurses were surveyed with regard to their views on the following: (1) student learning objectives, (2) factors causing a patient to reject or accept a student, and (3) the role of the nurse in medical student education.
Results
Eighty-nine nurses ranked student tasks (objectives) as very appropriate, appropriate, neutral, inappropriate, and very inappropriate. History and physical examination, witnessing deliveries, assisting at deliveries, and following up women in labor were rated very appropriate or appropriate by more than 96% of nurses; 85% approved of students doing supervised deliveries. Nursing staff were equally divided in approving or disapproving of pelvic exams in labour and outpatient assessment by students. Artificial rupture of membranes, fetal scalp electrode application, and episiotomy repair were not approved of by more than 70% of nurses. The most important factors causing a patient to reject or accept a student were felt to be bedside manner and previous experience with a student, with least important being attractiveness, gender, and the nurse's opinion. Eighty-seven percent of nurses declared that one of their roles is to help students gain experience, but 71% said they would protect women from students with whom they were not comfortable.
Conclusion
Labor and delivery nurses generally have a more positive attitude toward students and their learning than review of evaluations by the students would suggest. However, nurses have reservations about students performing technical procedures in the labor and delivery room. Creation of guidelines (objectives) with nursing input and better briefing of students with regard to nursing expectations may improve the student's experience.

