Integral passive devices are resistors, capacitors, inductors and integrated networks that are an integral part of the interconnection substrate (printed wiring board). Miniaturization, increased product function and performance are driving the need for higher component density and improved component performance. Eventually component density and performance requirements will force hand held product manufacturers to integrate the passive components within the printed wiring board (PWB). This paper is the work of the Passive Component Technology Working Group (P-TWG) of the National Electronics Manufacturing Initiative (NEMI). NEMI is a privately funded initiative created to promote collaborative development by industry, government and academia of the underlying technology and infrastructure required to facilitate manufacture of new high-technology electronic products in North America. The obstacles which must be overcome to implement integral passives are very significant. First of all, integral passives will profoundly change the design process and much characterization and modeling must be done to allow designers to easily transition from use of discretes to integral passives. Since passives will become part of the PWB process, tools and methods must also be developed which reduce the added turnaround time which will probably be required to make design changes in boards using integrated passives. Since a high density interconnection substrate is an inherent primary element and the essential part of the manufacturing process of integral passive components, a vital forward thinking interconnect substrate and passive component industry is essential to reclaiming the electronics manufacturing infrastructure. Electronic design engineers, passive component and interconnection substrate manufacturers together have an opportunity to create this new manufacturing infrastructure. The ultimate objective of this new paradigm is to point the way towards smaller, faster and less expensive electronic products that get to market first and perform reliably for their consumers
