Objective
Renin-angiotensin System is essential for the homeostasis of blood pressure in humans. The roles of renin-angiotensin system gene polymorphisms including angiotensinogen, angiotensin-converting enzyme, renin and angiotensin II receptor, type 1 genes in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia have been extensively studied, but most association studies produced either negative or inconsistent results. Prolylcarboxypeptidase encodes a lysosomal enzyme and is a regulator for both renin-angiotensin system and the kallikrein-kinin system. There is no published study on prolylcarboxypeptidase gene and preeclampsia.
Study design
We investigated the independent and joint association of five polymorphisms in angiotensinogen, angiotensin-converting enzyme, and prolylcarboxypeptidase gene and chronic hypertension with the risk of preeclampsia in 125 preeclamptic and 1040 non-preeclamptic black women enrolled at the Boston Medical Center. We used logistic regression models to estimate the odds ratios of risk for preeclampsia associated with each gene polymorphism and its joint association with chronic hypertension.
Results
No association was found in four polymorphisms in angiotensinogen and angiotensin-converting enzyme. Prolylcarboxypeptidase E112D (rs2298668) D allele along and jointly with chronic hypertension were associated with a significantly increased risk of preeclampsia. Compared to women with homozygous EE genotype and without chronic hypertension, higher risks of preeclampsia were observed in DD women without chronic hypertension (OR = 3.7, 95% CI, 1.2 - 12.4) and EE women with chronic hypertension (OR = 9.1, 95% CI: 4.7 - 17.6). Women with both D allele and chronic hypertension had the highest risk (OR = 158, 95% CI, 25-infinite). This finding was validated in an independent sample of 1,015 non-black women. We further compared the prolylcarboxypeptidase transcript levels in peripheral blood cells of 23 preeclamptic (30% with chronic hypertension) and 51 non-preeclamptic (6% with chronic hypertension) women 2 - 3 days after delivery. The PRCP transcript levels were lower in ED/DD women than in EE woman (P = .03) and lower in preeclamptic women than in non-preeclamptic women (P = .007).
Conclusion
Our data showed that prolylcarboxypeptidase D allele coupled with chronic hypertension was associated with a significantly increased risk of preeclampsia in both black and non-black women. Gene expression assays lent further support for the functional significance of prolylcarboxypeptidase in the etiology of preeclampsia.

