Objective
The objective of the study was to evaluate the impact of obesity on length of surgery, blood loss, and intra- and postoperative complications in women who underwent retropubic surgery for stress urinary incontinence.
Study design
Of 449 women participating in a multicenter, randomized trial evaluating antibiotic prophylaxis in women with suprapubic catheters, 250 women underwent retropubic anti-incontinence procedures. This is a prospective nested cohort study of these women, 79 (32%) of whom were obese (body mass index 30 or greater) and 171 (68%) overweight or normal weight (body mass index less than 30). Data collected included demographic variables, past medical history, physical examination, and intraoperative and postoperative complications. Data were analyzed with Fisher's exact for dichotomous variables, Student t tests for continuous variables, and analysis of variance for multivariate analysis. Significance was set at P< .05.
Results
Obese women undergoing stress urinary incontinence surgery were younger than nonobese women (48.7 versus 51.9 years, respectively, P< .019). The number and type of additional surgeries performed were similar between groups with the exception that obese women were less likely to undergo abdominal apical suspensions (P = .006) or abdominal paravaginal repairs (P = .001); therefore, estimated blood loss, change in hematocrit, length of stay, surgery, and suprapubic catheterization comparisons are adjusted for the performance of these procedures. Estimated surgical blood loss was greater for obese women (344 versus 284 P = .03); however, change in hematocrit was lower for obese than nonobese women (6.6 versus 7.3, P = .048). Mean length of surgery was 15 minutes longer in obese women (P = .02). Length of hospital stay did not vary between groups (P = NS). Major intraoperative complications were uncommon (14 [5.6%]), with no difference between weight groups. Incidence of postoperative urinary tract infection, wound infections, or postoperative major complications were likewise similar between groups (all P> .05).
Conclusion
Surgery takes longer for obese patients, but blood loss as recorded by change in hematocrit is lower. Major complications were rare and similar between weight groups, as were infectious complications.

