Recent studies and authorities have advocated the use of low-dose thiazide diuretics as first-line treatment agents in elderly hypertensives. However, these recommendations were based solely on blood pressure (BP) measured in the clinic. The objective of the present 32-week double-blind study was to compare the effects of hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) and amlodipine (AML) in elderly patients with confirmed ambulatory hypertension. After a 4-week placebo washout period, 42 (25 men, 17 women) patients (mean age, 69 years) with clinic sitting diastolic BP of 95 to 114 mm Hg and daytime ambulatory diastolic BP of ≥90 mm Hg were randomized double-blind to receive AML 5 to 10 mg (n = 21) or HCTZ 12.5 to 25 mg (n = 21) once daily. After 8 weeks of monotherapy, patients in whom clinic diastolic BP remained ≥ 90 mm Hg were given combination therapy with the other agent. Amlodipine monotherapy induced significant reductions in clinic, mean 24-h, daytime and sleep systolic/diastolic BPs whereas only clinic BP decreased significantly in patients treated with HCTZ monotherapy. Moreover, 19/21 versus 8/21 patients on AML and HCTZ monotherapies achieved adequate BP control. At the end of the 32-week treatment period, combination therapy in the HCTZ group resulted in statistically significant reductions in clinic as well as in 24-h, daytime and sleep ambulatory BPs that were similar to those observed in the AML monotherapy group.
In conclusion, the administration of AML monotherapy induced significant reductions in both clinic and ambulatory BPs in elderly patients whereas only clinic BP was significantly decreased by HCTZ monotherapy. Moreover, the addition of AML to HCTZ in patients inadequately controlled by monotherapy has permitted statistically significant decrements in clinic as well as in ambulatory BP. Consequently, the results of the present study suggest that the use of HCTZ in doses of up to 25 mg daily is inadequate for ambulatory BP control in the elderly despite official recommendations.

