The objective of the Terrestrial Planet Finder (TPF) mission is to find and characterize earth-like planets orbiting other stars. Three architectural options are under consideration for this mission: a formation-flying interferometer (FFI), a structurally-connected interferometer, and a coronagraph. One of these options can be selected as the TPF baseline design in 2006. This paper describes the technology tasks underway to establish the viability of precision formation flying for the FFI option. In particular, interferometric science observations require autonomous precise control and maneuvering of five spacecraft to an accuracy of 2 cm in range and 1 arc-minute in bearing. This precision must be maintained over interspacecraft ranges varying from a few meters to hundreds of meters. Autonomous operations, ranging from formation acquisition and formation maneuvering to high precision formation flying during science observations, are required. Challenges lie in meeting the demanding performance requirements as well as in demonstrating the long-term robustness of the autonomous formation flying system. These challenges are unprecedented for deep space missions. To address them, research is under way in the areas of formation control algorithms, relative sensor technologies, system design, end-to-end real-time system simulation, and ground-based and micro-g end-to-end system demonstrations. Four interrelated testbeds are under development concurrently with the FFI system design. The testbeds include the formation algorithms &amp; simulation testbed (FAST), the formation sensor testbed (FST), the formation control testbed (FCT) and the synchronized position hold engage re-orient experimental satellites (SPHERES) experiment. Formation flying technologies developed under the StarLight project and the NASA Distributed Spacecraft Technology (DST) program are being leveraged and expanded to meet the TPF requirements. This paper provides an overview of the ongoing precision for- - mation flying technology development activities.
