Cost reductions for pretreatment and bioconversion processes are key objectives necessary to the successful deployment of a bioethanol industry. These unit operations have long been recognized for their impact on the production cost of ethanol. One strategy to achieve this objective is to improve the pretreatment process to produce a pretreated substrate resulting in reduced bioconversion time, lower cellulase enzyme usage, and/or higher ethanol yields. Previous research produced a highly digestible pretreated yellow poplar substrate using a multistage, continuously flowing, very dilute sulfuric acid (0.07% (w/v)) pretreatment. This process reduced the time required for the bioconversion of pretreated yellow poplar sawdust to ethanol. This resulted in a substantially improved yield of ethanol from cellulose. However, the liquid volume requirements, steam demand, and complexity of the flow-through reactor configuration were determined to be serious barriers to commercialization of that process. A reconfigured process to achieve similar performance has been developed using a singlestage batch pretreatment followed by a separation of solids and liquids and washing of the solids at a temperatures between 130 and 150 °C. Separation and washing at the elevated temperature is believed to prevent a large fraction of the solubilized lignin and xylan from reprecipitating and/or reassociating with the pretreated solids. This washing of the solids at elevated temperature resulted in both higher recovered yields of soluble xylose sugars and a more digestible pretreated substrate for enzymatic hydrolysis. Key operating variables and process performance indicators included acid concentration, temperature, wash volume, wash temperature, soluble xylose recovery, and performance of the washed, pretreated solids in bioconversion via simultaneous saccharification and fermentation (SSF). Initial results indicated over a 50% increase in ethanol yield at 72 h for the hot washed material as compared to the control (no washing, no separation) and a 43% reduction of in the bioconversion time required for a high ethanol yield from cellulose
