The core of civilized life is identified as the village in the history of man.
With all the advances made in urbanization, the rural area has not lost its
essence in the practical behavior of a culture’s socioeconomic life. However,
with the increasing threats whether natural or manmade, the susceptibility of
rural area is the same as urban area and the same efforts regarding the
sustainability of urban area must be taken for the rural area on national bases.
There are four major factors that have to be closely considered and
monitored: sustainability of the natural resources, social sustainability,
political sustainability and economic sustainability. In fact sustainable
development of the country/village is not justified through its environmental
wellbeing, but through the total of the above mentioned factors. In this
article, through assessment on the rural procedures with respect to the
population density, the economical abilities in agriculture and the capacity of
accepting urban population during emergencies etc. are being discussed. This
consideration can be clarified when the geographical position and situation
of the urban area is assessed and evaluated nationwide. Regarding the
existing rural area and their development plans, the pilot project, in addition
to the previously practiced measures and used indexes, the passive defense is
of essence and should be observed in full extent if the objective is to have
sustainable rural development in Iran by close consideration of the above
mentioned four factors. Passive defense includes a total of defensive
measures that do not use arms, while increasing the prevention of harm,
mitigation of vulnerability, sustaining the essential activities, promoting the
national sustainability and facilitating the crisis management against threats,
military or other. Therefore, passive defense should be applied and practiced
in the rural areas nationwide. In this article the attempt is made to seek and
identify the details necessary for implementation of passive defense in the
rural area.
