Cell therapy based on cell encapsulation technology holds out the promise of the treatment of many
diseases. The technology of cell encapsulation represents a strategy in which cells that secrete therapeutic
products are immobilized and immunoprotected within polymeric and biocompatible carriers. Hydrogels -
highly hydrated polymer networks- have ideal characteristics for this application because of good
biocompatibility and mimicking natural ECM properties. They can homogeneously incorporate and
suspend cells, growth factors, and other bioactive compounds. Temperature-sensitive hydrogels, which can
form implants in situ in response to temperature change, from ambient to body temperature, have been
extensively used in various cell encapsulation, and tissue repair.
The objective of this study was preparation, Characterization and selection the optimum composition of
agarose-gelatin blend hydrogel, for cell encapsulation application. In order to obtain hydrogel with
appropriate properties, rheological, mechanical, and structural characteristics of obtained hydrogels were
examined. Furthermore, the stability of samples was characterized by degradation and gelatin release
measurements under physiological condition. Cell attachment and cytotoxicity analysis were also
performed.
Based on the results, hydrogel containing a 1:1 mixture of gelatin and agarose exhibited sol-to-gel transition
near body temperature. Samples contain 50% agarose and more, exhibited mechanical integrity under
physiological condition. Indentation test of the mechanical properties demonstrated viscoelastic behavior of
the blend gelatin-agarose hydrogels under static load; however by increasing the agarose portion, hydrogel
behaved more elastically. In vitro biocompatibility experiments showed undetectable cytotoxicity of the
hydrogels. Also adding gelatin to agarose modified cell attachment behavior. The results of this study
indicate the possibility of the potential use of prepared thermo-responsive agarose/gelatin conjugate with
nearly same portion of two components as cell encapsulation carrier.
