In 1990 s,globalization was one of the controversial topic among different countries , that there are various ideas toward it.
The survay of the globalization consequences have remarkable effects on human life dimensions including political economical social and cultural effects which attract management thinkers ,politicians ,economists , culture agents all over the worlds. In this study the researcher studies some influential factors in globalization and the effect of globalization on political, social ,cultural factors and also globalization was quantitatively analysed. Therefore ,the major question is what factors are influential in globalization and which factor has the most imponant role in it? Whether Economical liberation and reducing financial corruption in reforming managerial discipline promote Iran rank in globalization and which ane has more important role in its promotion (economical liberation and reducing fiancial corruption).
This researchs ,objective is to find an answer to above mentional question to show government efficiency of being member of word trade organization (WTO) by managemential discipline reformation easily ,the positive consequence is maximum use of membership and toward off negative consequences in addition to theorical studies and exploiting globalization factors ,different internet sites were used like A.T Kearney international studies institution for reaching these objectives , and for determining the rank of 62 countries as statistical population and obtaining economical liberation rank,Heritage foundation internet site was used and financial corruption perception index was obtained from transparency international organization internet site.
This research was conducted based on wto topics : 1- the effective factors of globalization and determining them.
2- manegerial discipline terms for promoting iran rank using Economic Freedom tools and reducing financial corruption and determining their amount of signifance.
The method of archive data collection through internet sites was used and spermans correlation coefficient was used for selecting and analysing the best factors of globalization among different Economical,political personal and technical factors and determining the priority of manegmental terms ( Economic Freedom and finacial corruption ).
The research result show that the intensity of globalization factors correlation are as following respectively:
Technical , personal , economical and political ,and Economic.1 Freedom is prefered to fiancial corruption as managemental reform tools.
Researches show that respecting different requests respecting,different requests of iran for joining word trade organization considering special economical and social situation ,it is necessary to place economical liberation in government managers agenda and also it is a necessary managemental reforms for promoting iran rank in globalization .

