Total quality management is a modern management, which promotes the quality level of goods and services, and responses to the increasing demands of customers. Pay attention to the quality and total quality management not only restricted to the production organization, but also, included the governmental public, according to the implementation approval plan of total quality management trial system in governmental public dated 19 June 2001, official supreme council has been observed in governmental public, but had slow implementation in comparison with developed countries. The transmission rate of this system in governmental public was not the same. However the implementation of total quality management is a necessity, but if suitable preparation not performed in the  cultural fields, the organization wouldn't achieved necessary benefits from implementation of total quality management models, such as ISO 9000. on the contrary, the T.Q.M users can improve in right performance method of management phenomena, in the case of correct perception of cultural factors. Some of this cultural difficulties that are in government organization are (Etatism, eloquence, self- pivotal, routine, mudalism)
Which are performance difficulties of T.Q.M in governmental public.
This research study the factors regard to slow transmission of T.Q.M. in the figure of Iran governmental public and represented a suitable model.
According to the objective and nature of this research, the subject of this research has been improved base on descriptive-analytic method, that the researchers involve himself with the variable position and situation, just study and describe what ever exist. For data collection used two questionnaires that these questionnaires distributed between 2000 government staffs as sampling in 5 states. In this research also used the present method in descriptive statistic, such as, box charts to show and compare collected data, and to measure the relation between variables in represented answers. Used Spirman correlation coefficient test, and also valic kroskal test used for comparison method of distribution different factors in different states.

