Background: study conducted by the Iran and the world show that the domestic violence against women while increasing the amount, caused damage of social and psychological many for its victims.
Objective: study in order to determine the kinds of symptoms and the domestic violence against women, its side effects and the amount of influence communication skills training, solve the problem and deal with psychological pressure to reduce women in it.
Methods: This study on the interference of 301 women 20 to 50-year-old resident in Minoodar & Kosar regions of Qazvin in the 2007-2008. Study population included the mothers of pupils from selected primary schools chosen through a multi-staged random sampling method. Data were collected using a questionnaire consisting of 3 sections including a section on demographic characteristics of both wife and husband, another section containing 60 questions based on Likert scales over different patterns of violence against women, and lastly, a section on complications of victims of domestic violence. Data were recorded both at the beginning and a year later post- intervention and further processed and analyzed using t-test for dependent samples. Findings: after the intervention, the average violence against women by their husbands had reduced 11.5% to 8.54%, yet the difference between mean values was shown to be insignificant, statistically. However, when assessing every single example of violence separately, some patterns of violence were found to be significantly decreased (p<0.05). The most common types of complications among victims of violence were psychoneurotic disorder (11%), abortion (4%), some bruising around eyes (2.66%). Additionally, the most and the least common types of violent behaviors against women were verbal abuse and tying up by 41.2% and 0.07%, respectively.
Conclusion: The research showed that women to escape the violence in the domestic skills to many, especially his skills in connection with his wife and relations between the individual. In addition, for the reduction in this kind of violence is necessary to men as agents violence connection between the individual skill to learn.

