Over the past decade, a growing body of evidence has shown that attachment orientations deeply influence the way people think and feel about their romantic relationships. According to two factor model of romantic attachment proposed by Bartholomew and Horowitz, internal models of self and others are independent dimensions that in combination, form four styles of adult romantic attachments, secure, dismissing, preoccupied and fearful. The objective of the current study which is a part of International Sexuality Description Project (ISDP) in Iran and Bradly University collaboration, is to identify the cultural dimensions of attachment .Method: 200 male and female students from different faculties of Iran University of Medical Sciences were recruited with convenient method of sampling and completed Relationship and Personality traits questionnaires. The questionnaires included questions regarding attachment styles, and dark triad personality traits. Results: The findings showed the prominence of secure attachment style compared to other three styles in our research population. No significant differences were found in attachment styles of male and female students. The correlation between Self and Other models was not significant and the correlations between attachment styles and Self and Other models were consistent with the findings from the majority of cultures, studied. A significant relationship between dismissing attachment style and Dark Triad of personality was not found .Female students were significantly more narcissistic than male students and males were significantly more psychopath than females. Discussion and Conclusion: The secure attachment style as the highest rated form of romantic attachment and the relationship of attachment styles with internal models of Self and Other in our student population are similar with the findings of the majority of western and eastern cultures. However, we must be cautious when interpreting our findings which are based soley on self- report measures and psychological tests and avoid generalizing them to nonstudents population.

