Drought causes damages on range land ecosystems, which should be controlled by devising appropriate management measures. Prediction ol" necessary conditions and effective factors in susiainability of range ecosysiem in drought condiiions has a great important in management and mitigation ol this phenomenon. Thus, the main objective of this research was the investigation and determining the overall situation and factor effecting the susiainability of range ecosystems in drought condition compared to rainy condition in Fars province. Iran. For this puipose an analytical - descriptive rese;ireh method was used. Population of study included the rangers of Fars prov ince. ol" which a sample si/.e was taken by using mulii - sampling method. Dependent variables of the study included the rangeland situation in drought and rainy conditions and susiainability threat of rangeland in drought condiiions and the independent variables was factors affecting the s us la in ability of range ecosystems dining the last five years. The findings of the reseaiuh showed that there was a significant difference between thirteen indicators (out of fifteen indicators that were studied) concerning the degree of susiainability of rangeland ecosystems in drought and vainy conditions. The finding also indicated thai drought had a significant effect on the susiainability of range ecosystem. Based on ihe rese;uvh findings the dependent variables of the study including: types of range forage, lypc of range coverage, type of rangeland. the area of range, drinking water resources for cattle, residence style and the area of orchard garden effected the overall susiainability of rangeland ecosystem in drought and rainy conditions. The research recommended certain measures to be taken for the purposes of drought mitigation including: delivering extension and training programs related to livestock, range and drought, especially before the occurrence of drought, using the indigenous knowledge of range users and using ihe range in accordance v\ith the principles of sustainable measures
