Background and Objective: Although there are numerous evidence that consumption of iron, as supplementary has remarkable positive effects on iron status in pregnant women at their delivery thin and later other research have revealed that relation the higher hemoglobin levels are related to the  increased risk of  bearing small in fants as a result of  gestional age, still birth, pregnancy induced hypertension, intrauterine restriction, low birth weight of in fants, preterm birth, and perinatal death. In there cases, it seems that the normal increase of blood volume is decreased in pregnancy. This study seeks to investigate the efficacy of iron supplements on
The infants in women with hemoglobin higher than 13.2 g/dl in 13th and 18th weeks of   pregnancy.

Materials and Methods: The research was conducted by considerating medical files of mothers and their infants that had a cquired the specific conditions of study the in six hospitals (Najmieh, Lolagar, Shariati, Hazrat Zeynab, maryam, & Baghiatollah). 725 pregnant women with hemoglobin concentration of higher than 13.2 g/dl in 13th and 18th weeks of pregnancy were randomly selected and divided into two groups of case  group (n=432) and control group (n=293). The case group consumed one ferrous sulfate pill containing 50 mg iron daily  from 20th weeks of pregnancy up to the end of their pregnancy, while the control group consumed placebo. At the beginning, these two groups were homogenious inpoint age, social economic situation, parity, previous adverse pregnancy outcomes, body mass index, time interval between the last pregnancy with the present one, and hemoglobin concentration.

Results: The results of this study revealed that routine consumption of iron supplementats by pregnant women with hemoglobin concentration higher than 13.2 g/dl in 13th and 18th weeks of pregnancy compared to the pregnant women who had not received iron supplementats increased significantly the low birth weight ,neonatal jaundice and polycythemia in their neonates. Furthermore, the means of hemoglobin concentration in their neonates  were significantly higher than thase of the control group; However the mean of blood sugar concentration in their neonate was significantly lower than that of the control group.

Conclusion: It seems that during pregnancy the consumption of iron supplementats by pregnant women, will expose them to the increased risk of low birth weight, neonatal jaundice and polycitehemia in the neonats as a result of lack of suitable blood hemodilusion and ultimately damage of utero-placental circulation.


