Background and Objective: The purpose of this study was to assesses efficacy of Benson's relaxation technique on postoperative pain in coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) in patients. One of the most expressed complaines following CABG is chest pain originating from the operation site. Because of side effects from opioids, this is important to use non- pharmacological methods such as Benson's relaxation technique.
Subjects and Methods: This clinical trial study, 80 patients candidate CABG randomly divided on to two equal groups, fot paint management we used Benson's relaxations- analgeic drugs in test group and only of analgeic drugs in control group. The data collection tools consisted of demographic data, vital sign, and check list for amount of analgesic drugs and visual analogues seal for pain severity. Then pain severity, vital signs, and the amount of medication used were assessed before and immediately after relaxation. Finally data were analyzed by SPSS , t-test, and Chi square test.
Results: The findings of this study showed the mean of pain severity within 24, 48 and 72 hours before and after relaxation in the intervention group in to two stage reduced and were significant difference (P=0.0001). Also, Mann-Whitney test showed that there was a significant deference in mean of pain severity between two groups after relaxation P<0.0001). In addition, paired t-test showed that relaxation technique in intervention group after surgery effected on the respiratory rate, heart rate, and diastolic blood pressers and there was significant difference before and after relaxation (P=0.05). Only point attention was significant difference in respiratory rate between two groups(P=0.01). Related with the consumption rate of analgesic drugs didnt show significant difference between two groups (P>0.05), but in intervention group consumption rate after 24 hours relaxation showed breif decrease.
Conclusion: This study assumption Benson's relaxation technique not only can reduce postoperative pain in CABG pain, but also effected vital sign specifically respiratory rate and increased patients peacfulness (satisfaction). Therefore can be used as an complementary therapy with analgesics to relief pain. Sci Med J 2010;8(4):479-89

