Background and Objective: There are several techniques for the diagnosing of salmonella infectious.
Several molecular methods such as PCR and hybridization assay have recently been used for the detection of
this bacterium. However, these methods require precision instruments for amplification and complex
procedures, which are the major obstacles to the widespread use of these methods in relatively small scale
clinical laboratories, clinics and the filed laboratories. Recently, a new, rapid and sensitive technique called
loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) was developed.
Materials and Methods: In this study we used 7 different strains of salmonella to compare the PCR with
LAMP method. FDr PCR test we used thermocycler, but The LAMP reaction can be conducted under
isothermal conditions by using only one type of enzyme and four primers recognizing six distinct regions.
The most important merit of this method is that no denaturation of the DNA template is required, SD,
technique is simple and no need to thermocyclcr machine and several temperatures cycles.
Results: Conventional PCR method for the detection of Salmonella with standard therrnocylcer takes 3 hrs
but, with LAMP method we were able to amplify and detect the salmonella in very simple thermal block
made in IRAN. After Optimization of the process it was possible to rapidly detect and identify Salmonella
typhi bacteria within 90 minutes. This method was also 100 times more sensitive comparing to the PCR
method.
Conclusion: According to the results, comparing LAMP isothermal amplification method for detection and
identification of SalmoneIla with conventional PCR we have been able to determine the simplicity, speed (3
times) and the superior sensitivity( I00 times) of the LAMP tD PCR method. This Method is more simple,
faster and cheaper (10 times). Another advantage is independence to cycle's temperature and thermo-cycling
and replacement with one thermo block which is very simple, inexpensive and made in inside the country,
