infectious and hospital related disease with high especially in aging women. As we know the infection would be identified in urine sample based on KASS scale while in spite of valuable usage of this method the culture results of a significant number of patients appear to be negative while there may be symptoms of infection. On the other hand organisms which are not identified using the above separation method are called "Fastidious". So the objective in this research work is to find an effective way fro identification and treatment using separation of fastidious bacteria technique in those urine samples showing a negative culture result with common (abovementioned) methods while the patient may have some in­fection symptoms.
Material and method: In this research the job was to identify and separate fastidious bacteria in 1075 samples of aging women urine, with changes in culture media incubation conditions and level of gases able to separation of fastidious Bacterium. As well number of leucocytes in the initial sample and existence of pus in urine sample were determined. Meantime study of medical records for determination of symptoms and antibiotics adminis­tration was considered and all results were compared with each other and finally evaluated based on the control group.
Findings: After aerobic and nocturnal culture of 1075 urine samples, 338 cases were positive, 99 cases had basic count, 159 cases were mixed and 434 cases were negative. Out of negative cases in the said method, us­ing fastidious bacteria separation technique, cases had fastidious bacteria more than 50% of which had some symptoms of infection showing a sig­nificant difference.
Abstract
1 - Faculty member of university of social welfare and Rehabilitation sciences- Email : n.moosavi@uswr.ac.ir <mailto:n.moosavi@uswr.ac.ir>
Separation of Fastidious Bacteria in Aging Women Urine Samples
Najmossadat Moosavi 1
Conclusion: For separation and identification of urine infection factors in aging women patients with negative nocturnal aerobic culture, especially when it was coincided with presence of symptoms. Additional sample in selective and extra environment along with changes in incubation condi­tions would be necessary for bacteria separation
