Introduction & Objective: Vitex agnus castus (Verbenaceae) is a phytoestrogeic herb native to the Middle East and southern Europe. It has clinical usage in so many countries. In this research, the effects of Vitex agnus castus extract was investigated on spermatogenesis of male Balb/C mice.
Materials & Methods: This is an experimental study in which adult male mice were chosen and divided into 3 groups: control, vehicle, and experimental. Animals were daily injected (i.p.) with 65, 165 265, 365, and 465 mg/kg of seed extract for ten consecutive days. Then the animals were weighed and eventually killed by cervical dislocation 2 weeks after the last injection. The caudal part of the right epididymis was used for sperm counting. After macroscopic investigation (weight, diameter and volume of testes) tissues were fixed in Buin's fixative. Tissues were cut at 5 |im, stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin (H& E).Ccollected data was analyzed by the SPSS software by using one-way ANOVA.
Results: No significant differences in body weight, volume, weight and diameter of testes was seen. Light microscopic studies showed a significant reduction in germinal epithelium in doses of 265 and 365 mg/kg and increased of interstitial tissue area in doses of 265, 365, and 465 mg/kg of extract. There was no significant difference in epithelium thickness and of the diameter of the epididymis. Germinal cells contained pyknotic nuclei and several holes that were found scattered in the tubules. Testis also showed a general disarrangement in various germinal elements of seminiferous tubules. Result of sperms count indicated a significant decreasing of spermatozoa in animals which received 265 and 365 mg/kg of extract.
Conclusion: Vitex agnus castus contains essential oils, iridoid glycosides, flavonoids diterpenes, and essential fatty acids. The results suggest that its contraceptive effects is related to its flavonoids and essential fatty acids but further studies is needed to focus on the pharmacokinetics of this plant.
