Introduction & Objective: Injuries resulting from ignoring proper working posture especially in employees who sitting at workplace for more than % of working hours are costly, and create significant pain and discomfort. Decreasing of these injuries is most effectively accomplished through the application of ergonomic design principles. Sometimes, however, barriers (technical and economic) preclude ergonomic improvement and, consequently, some organizations rely on the use of proper sitting techniques and maintaining proper working posture as a major control strategy during workday. The problem, however, is that these process performing is inconsistent and managers have a difficult time motivating use of these techniques. The main aim of this study was to understand the factors driving proper working posture among employees.
Materials & Methods: This study used the theory of planned behavior to predict upright working posture maintenance among 222 of assembling, machinery and printing line's employees at a Qazvin Alborz industrial town manufacturing organization. Structural equation modeling, explanatory and confirmatory factor analysis were employed to analyze relationships among constructs.
Results: Results revealed that attitude (p< 0.05, (3= 0.53) and intention (p< 0.05, (3= 0.46) were the strongest predictors of proper working posture maintenance behavior. Perceived behavior control, to a lesser degree, were also important influences on intention (p< 0.05, (3= 0.34) and behavior (p< 0.05, (3= 0.28). Subjective norms did not surface as effective direct predictors of upright working posture maintenance, but did affect behavior and intent via mediating factors (attitudes subjective norms and perceived behavioral control). Finally, the TPB was supported as an effective model explaining upright working posture maintenance, and had potential application for many other safety- related behaviors.
Conclusion: results of this study emphasis on considering factors such as attitude and perceived control behavior and create supportive managerial network for encouraging and training employees for maintaining proper working posture during workday.
