Introduction: The quality work life is regarded as a global concept for organizational development and manpower management, and its provision and improvement is considered the main key to the success of any organization. The improvement of the quality work life is in fact considered a skill for the betterment of organizations by senior directors. Objective: To improve the management's productivity of hospital by inert ising of the quality work life of the managers.
Methods: The present research is carried out in descriptive, cross-sectional method. The study population are the directors of the hospitals of the Social Security Organization of Tehran Province (N=10) The data gathered using two questionnaires, of which the 29-questions questionnaire related to the qual i ty work life based on thequality work life components. (Tatel, Casio, Morton, and the American Management Association, and the 21-item questionnaire were a questionnaire on productivity prepared based on Hersi and Goldsmith Model, scored based on Likret 5~score scale. In order to evaluate the consists icy of questionnaires, the alpha method of Cronbakh was used. The alpha coefficient of Cronbakh was 0.86 and 0.89, respectively. The data was analyzed using SPSS software package and Speann. it Correlation Coefficient).
Results Among the quality work life components, including materialistic and educational components, democracy in organization, participation in decision making Job design, and work space in organizations, the component of work space was located at the highest position, with an average of 3.72, and job design at the lowest point, with a coefficient of 2.90. Participation in decision making, with a correlation coefficient of0.858 ■ P-value=0,002) showed the highest correlation with the quality work I ifefrom thestatistical point of view, and materialistic privileges with a correlation coefficient of 0.358 (P-value=0.310) showed no correlati >ii (P-value>0,05). On the other hand, given the averages obtained for productivity components, the component of job identification with an average of 4,4 was at the top and performance feedback with an average of 2.3 at the lowest point. The component of capacity, with a correlation coefficient ofO.664 (P- value-G 16), showed a positive and meaningful correlation with the productivity component. Based on the hypothec is put forward, only the component "democracy in organization", with a con-elation coefficient of 0.665 (P value=0.036), showed a positive and meaningful correlation with productivity. Conclusion: There is a significant correlation between the quality work life and the productivity of the management of hospitals of the Social Security Organization of Tehran Province. Productivity could be improve I through adopting logical principles and procedures such as encouragement.
