Energy consumption is an appropriate measure for assessing the extent of development and quality of life in a country. Continuity of energy supply and ensuring long term accessibility to required resources calls for a comprehensive energy plan. This is why energy planning is an undeniable national economic and strategic necessity. The main objective of this study is devising an energy planning model that takes into account non-renewable and renewable energy sources and environmental constraints of the country.
In order to reach the desired results we use a matrix modeling approach to the energy system. We use the energy balance sheet of the reference year to develop a model for planning the country's energy system. An energy model allows us to study the impact of different scenarios with respect to consumption patterns, energy efficiency, different mixes of various sources of energy, changes in intermediate technologies, changes in energy loss in transmission and exports and imports of different energy sources. We continue to study the electricity sector, by reviewing electric energy planning and integration of supply and demand factors and the different choices for production and distribution of the electric network. The proposed model is used to calculate optimal production mix and path for expansion o f the network, taking into account the form of final consumption, amount of electric energy needed, mix of energy sources used by power stations and environmental constraints on emissions. The defined objective function takes into account the total cost of converting primary energy into electric energy, including the cost of investment in new power stations, and the fixed and variable costs of existing and new power stations, external costs of operating power stations, as well as costs of implementing consumption management measures. The following constraints are taken into account: the time needed to construct new power stations, the necessity of meeting electricity demand, operational limitations of power stations, limited potential of non-renewable sources of energy, consumption management measures, limits on use of different energy sources and environmental constraints. The linear operations research methodology is used to optimize the model.

