By: Ahdol Aziz Noamani
From Islamic point of view the man has been pious and theist since his creation. According to Quranic verses the Hod almighty created Prophet Adam as first human and appointed him as his success* >r on the earth. A great number < if western scholars also believes that believe 10 the God and the religion has been existing among all nations and nationalities since their early age. But later on. seeing different features of their surrounding nature su^h as vastness of sky and ihe i mnensit. of mountains, the man got amazed. Feeling the presence of a mighty and mysterious power, he gave it an objective shape and started paying homage for them.
With the passage of time, mountains, jungle, stones, the sun, the moon, celestial bodies and even Satan and the aenii were considered sacred and people went for their worship. The sign of this kind of sanctification can still be found in -.o many- religions. For instance the Hindus believe to the sanctity of the twin rivers (Ganga Si Janm a), the cow and many other living creatures. In Zoroastrian religion water, weather, soil and fire are to be rtspected Howt vr, due to changes rook place ::: rb sphere of thoughts and beliefs, different religions came into being that generally are categorized into four categories. This part of the article explains two of them:
1-	Materialism: according to thi> school of thought material is the essence of this world and any occurrence is iLS outcome. It denies the existence of any God or metaphysical power and overall the divine recognizing onl} the existence ol materia . In past, the followers of this school have also been known as atheist.
2-	Philosophical Divines: ii refer* to sets of ideas ihat the philosophers of the era before Christianity hnve concluded about beliefs and ethics; and in principle neither these people have been prophets nor theii ideiis have been i-oin revel) ;:i fhc number of these kinds of religions is very great and hundreds of them areonl\ hciin practi :ed in [ndi.i. How ;ve . • i i< ■ , ones such as Hinduism, Buddhism, and Zoioastrian hiive huge number ■...i^-■ -.v:-.- thrtwph nit the wi =i l>I

