Background and Objectives Diarrhea which leads to zinc wasting from body is one of the major causes of mortality in children around the world. Zinc is one of the elements that facilitate the repair of stomach and intestinal mucosa stimulation of immune system control and transfer of water and electrolytes in our body. World Health Organization (WHO) recommends use of zinc sulfate in all cases of diarrhea in addition to replacement of fluids and continuation of feeding in treatment of children with diarrhea. The objective of this study is evaluation of the effect of zinc sulfate (ZnSo4) on the recovery duration and appetite in children with diarrhea. This study evaluates the effect of ZnSo4 in prevention of respiratory infection and diarrhea for two months after taking the ZnSo4. Methods Two groups of children (total n=153) with non dysenteric acute diarrhea who were hospitalized in Qom s children hospital in 2007 were used in this clinical trials. Sixty four of these children (n=64) were randomized to the study group and eighty nine (n=89) to the control group. The children in the control group received the standard therapy (fluid & electrolyte therapy &continuation of feeding) for treatment of diarrhea and the children in the study group received standard treatment and 5 mg of zinc sulfate twice daily for two weeks. Neither of these two groups received any anti diarrhea therapy and/or antibiotics. Both groups were monitored for occurrence of new episodes of diarrhea and/or respiratory tract infection for two months after the end of their hospitalization. T-score and Fisher tools were used for statistical analysis of the gathered data. Results Children in two groups had several similarities such as gender decrease in appetite nausea and vomiting. There was not a significant difference between two groups with respect to the length of recovery new incidence of diarrhea and respiratory tract infection within two months after hospitalization. However the recovery of appetite after diarrhea treatment was faster in the study group (P=0.015). Conclusion The result of this study shows that the use of 10 mg per day of ZnSo4 does not effect the duration of diarrhea but accelerates the appetite recovery in the children with acute diarrhea. Also ZnSo4 does not significantly effect the prevention of diarrhea or respiratory tract infection within two months after receiving it.
