Background and objective: The human any one can be exposed to electromagnetic field produced by television, computer, MRI radiation and so on. Consideration of effect of electromagnetic field on various tissue especially folliculogenesis process is seemingly important. This study was focused on the effect of MRI radiation on folliculogenesis in adult rats.
Methods: We used a MRI device that could produce 1.5 Tesla electromagnetic radiations, and chose 22 wistar rats as laboratory animal models. Rats were divided into two equal groups as followings: experimental group which exposed by MRI device with 1.5 Tesla electromagnetic radiation and RF radiation and control group which exposed by MRI device with 1.5 Tesla electromagnetic radiation and without RF radiation. Rats were housed at temperature (22-25C) and light (12 h light/12 h dark) controlled condition with standard rat chow and tap water. Afterwards the rats were anesthetized with ether and blood samples were obtained from cardiac chambers for the measurement of serum levels of FSH, LH, estrogen and progesterone using radioimmunoassay (RIA).
Ovaries were then removed, fixed in 10% formalin and embedded in paraffin. Serial sections (5 nm thick) were prepared from both ovaries and stained using haematoxylin and eosin staining method. Diameter and weight of ovaries were also measured. In all sections, all follicles (primary, secondary and tertiary follicles) were counted. Statistical analysis was performed by T-test.
Results: The findings of the present study indicated that there was not a significant difference (P<0.5) in various groups in amount of progesterone, strogen, primary follicle, secondary follicle, graffian follicle, diameter and weight of ovaries but there was a significantly decrease (P<0.05) in amount of FSH and LH in experimental group ratio to control group.
Conclusion: The electromagnetic radiations in MRI device are not able to damage folliculogenesis process in adult female rats. Reduction of LH an FSH in experimental group can be for animal position while they were exposed on radiation. Finally MRI radiation can be safe for folliculogenesis process in adult female rats.

