Abstract

Background and Objective: Evaluation of the maximum mouth opening can be as diagnostic index in the clinical evaluation of the temporomandibular joint . Limitation of maximum mouth opening is one of joint dysfunction which can be result of infection, soft tissue scar, mandibular condylar fracture, or other temporomandibular disorder, since significant controversy has always been existed around the subject of " maximum mouth opening" , and due to the importance of this subject, this study was designed to investigate the normal range of maximum mouth opening in healthy subjects presented to dental school of Ahvaz university of medical sciences (AJUMS).

Subjects and Methods: In this descriptive study, the sample population consisted of 210 adults referred to the Faculty of Dentistry of AJUMS. The subjects were examined for maximum mouth opening. All subjects had a negative medical history, autoimmune disease, orthodontic treatment, orthognatic surgery, dental or skeletal crossbite, extreme brachycephalic or dolichocephalic facial patterns. Following selection of sample population, the range and die mean value of maximum mouth opening and their relation with sex , age body height were recorded and maximum mouth opening was measured. The data statistically analyzed using T-test.

Results: Of the 210 subjects, 48.6% were male and 51.4% were female. Mean value of age and was 32.5 years. The mean value of the body height was 175.8 cm for men and 160.6 cm for women. The mean value of maximal mouth opening was 49.9 mm , in the entire sample. The mean value and the range of maximal mouth opening was 52.19 mm for men and 47.8 mm for women. Significant differences were found between mouth opening in the male and female. (P=0.001). Also a significant difference was found between body height and maximum mouth opening (P=0.001).

Conclusion: In this research, a significant relationship was found between maximum mouth opening and height. This finding comes in agreement with the hypothesis that height may have an association with in maximum mouth opening. Sci Med J 2010; 9( 1): 1-6

