Dugongs (<i>Dugong</i> <i>dugon</i>) produce different types of vocalization such as chirp, trill, and barks. Previous reports showed that dugongs have two kinds of phonemes: long duration calls (trill) and short duration calls (chirp-squeaks hereinafter called chirp). Especially, the chirp and trill calls were widely reported in different populations. However, characteristics of call patterns in dugongs have never been reported. Moreover, the function of these calls was not revealed. The objective of this study is to classify the vocalization patterns of dugong calls and discuss the stability call sequences within and across local populations of dugongs. We recorded the underwater sound at the off Talibong Island, Trang, Thailand in 2004 and 2005 for 120 hours by an automatic underwater sound recording system (AUSOMS-D, System Intech, Tokyo). The AUSOMS-D is the water resistant stand-alone recording system and developed for passive acoustical monitoring targeting human audible range. The AUSOMS-D consisted of a pair of hydrophones located 2 m apart for calculating the bearings of the sound sources. The electric circuits and batteries were housed in a pressure-resistant case, and the hydrophones were connected to a stereo preamplifier. The sound signals were fed into a 1-kHz high pass filter to eliminate low frequency background noise. Digitized signals were recorded on an 80 GB removable hard disk drive by uncompressed format with a time stamp. The power supply system with batteries and DC/DC converter were also housed inside the case. The sampling frequency of the A/D converter was 44.1 kHz and the dynamic range was 74-120 dB (re 1 muPa) with a 16-bit resolution. Each hydrophone had flat frequency responses within 2 dB between 1 and 10 kHz. For the comparison purpose, we made recording of a captive dugong in Toba Aquarium, Japan, which was introduced from Philippine waters. We analyzed the underwater sound data set that was obtained in both animals in different en- vironment and populations. Short duration calls with less than 300 milliseconds were defined as chirp and trill was defined as a call lasting over 300 milliseconds. The end of a call sequence was defined at the silence over 3 seconds. Total of 1174 audible calls were detected from total of 12 hours data set (from 3:50 to 6:50 1-4 March 2004). Chirp were observed more than trill calls (567 chirps and 67 trills). Chirp-to-chirp transitions were most frequency observed (81.68%), whereas trill-to-trill transitions were the least (4.27%). Transitions between the two types of calls were also observed (6.98%, 7.07%). Trill appeared in the middle and the end of a call sequence. The position of the trill did not differ between wild individual in Thailand and a captive individual from off the Philippines that are considered to be separated populations. The stability of the sequence of each type of calls in a call sequence is investigated. Unlike the song of birds or baleen whales, the call sequence pattern of the dugong suggests small differences across the populations. The call sequence analysis as well as the behavioral context observation will provide the key to interpret the function of dugong calls.
