The objective of this study was to evaluate the immunoglobulin G (IgG) absorption by Santa Ines lambs under two colostrum
management systems usually used by producers. Twenty-seven Santa Ines newborn lambs received two meals of 250 ml of bovine
colostrum from Holstein cows (BC group) or ovine colostrum from Santa Ines ewes (OC group) at 0 and 6 h of life. Pools of BC and
OC were analyzed by radial immunodiffusion to quantify IgG. Results are expressed as least-square means and standard errors
of mean (means6s.e.m.). The concentration of IgG in bovine and ovine pools averaged 115.7620.5 and 48.165.0 mg/ml,
respectively, levels of concentration found in similar regular colostrum managements. The efficiency of IgG absorption was
evaluated under two aspects, maximum apparent efficiency of absorption and total apparent efficiency of absorption (AEAmax
and AEAtotal, respectively). The AEAmax was calculated taking into account the mass of IgG ingested just in the first meal of
colostrum at birth and the serum IgG concentration at 6 h while the AEAtotal took into account the serum IgG concentration
at 24 h of life that reflects the first colostrum offered at birth and the second meal at 6 h. The IgG and apparent efficiency of
absorption results were transformed into the square root and log base 10, respectively, and were presented as geometric leastsquare
means. In BC, lower ( P,0.05) AEAmax and AEAtotal were verified (14.2% and 15.6%, respectively), in relation to
OC (23.6% and 24.4%, respectively). Serum IgG concentrations at 24 h were significantly higher ( P,0.05) in BC (31.4 mg/ml,
respectively) compared with OC (22.2 mg/ml, respectively). The results in this study confirm that there is a limitation to the process
of IgG absorption by the enterocytes of newborn lambs, which determined a nonlinear behavior of passive immunity acquisition.
Similar values of AEAmax and AEAtotal for the two sources of colostrum reveal that the process of IgG absorption from the first
and second meals during the first 6 h of life did not change and indicates that the ingestion of a second feeding of quality
colostrum can enhance the acquisition of immune protection of newborn lambs.
