This paper is one of the few attempts made by social scientists to measure social
capital via psychometric approach, and is the only one of such kind to base its evidence
on the AsiaBarometer survey data. After first reviewing the history of social capital,
including its conceptual emergence and recent literatures, we expose the issue of
difficulty in the measurement of social capital despite its topical popularity. We tackle
this measurement issue by applying psychometric procedures to the AsiaBarometer
survey data of 2004, 2005, and 2006, focusing on questions pertaining to social capital
of ordinary individuals residing in the 29 survey societies. This paper is significant in two
aspects. First, using simple statistical procedures, it extracts various dimensions of social
capital without first knowing what dimensions to extract. In short, it does not try to
measure social capital using some kind of pre-defined concepts such as those outlined
in the historical review of our predecessors. Rather, it succeeds in manifesting key
factors of social capital – altruism, utilitarianism, communitarianism, and concordance
with prevailing regime – by mechanically processing collective responses by individual
respondents towards survey questions oriented with social capital. Though the paper
does not aim to establish its methodology as awidely held consensus on howtomeasure
social capital, it does give credence and recognition to psychometric approaches as
effectives means to measure social capital, which, by its very definition, calls for
‘objective’ approaches using collective data to measure ‘subjective’ notions of individual
actions within networks. Second, this paper is the first systematic empirical analysis
of social capital in all the subregions of Asia, i.e. East, Southeast, South, and Central.
It builds on our earlier works, including the 2006 paper on social capital in Central and South Asia, and gives empirical credence to important concepts on Asian political
culture.
