The main objective of this experiment was to monitor the impact of barn side and dietary crude protein (CP) on production
performance, manure production and composition, and ammonia nitrogen (N) emission from a lactating dairy herd housed in a
free-stall barn and managed under farm-like conditions throughout a number of months in each season of the year. The 78-cow
lactating herd of the University of Wisconsin-Platteville (USA) was halved and each group was allocated to either the north or
south side of the barn and either a recommended (REC) diet with 16.761.3% CP dry matter basis (DM) or an excess (EXC)
CP diet containing 1.5 units of CP above the REC diet (18.261.5%). In 7 months between February 2004 and January 2005,
total manure collection was conducted by manual scraping of the alleys and ammonia-N emission was calculated as intake
N1bedding N – milk N – scraped manure N. Side of the barn (northern v. southern exposure) did not influence measurements
and there was no effect of dietary CP on dry matter intake (DMI), milk, milk fat, and milk protein production, but a lower manure
N concentration was observed for the group of cows fed the REC diet compared with the EXC diet (3.43% v. 3.66% of DM).
Nitrogen intake was 63 g/day lower (643 v. 706 g/day), milk N was unaffected (157 g/day), manure N was 32 g/day lower (391 v.
423 g/day), and ammonia-N emission was 34 g/day lower (93 v. 127 g/day) for the group consuming the REC diet compared with
the group consuming the EXC diet. There were larger variations in measured responses among months of the year than between
level of dietary CP. Wet and dry manure excretions tended to be higher, but manure pH was reduced when corn silage became
unavailable and the diet included additional corn grain and alfalfa silage as the only forage source. Prediction of manure N
excretion for a group of cow determined as N intake – N milk was 9% higher than current prediction equations of the American
Society of Agricultural Engineers. Ammonia-N loss averaged 110 g/day per lactating cow, but ranged from 64 g/day to 178 g/day
with no clear seasonal pattern. There was no clear association between barn temperature, manure temperature or manure pH and
ammonia-N emission; however, intake N explained 61% of the variation in ammonia-N emission.
