Experiments carried out to determine the amino acid requirement in growing animals are often based on the premise that the
amino acid composition of body protein is constant. However, there are indications that this assumption may not be correct. The
objective of this study was to test the effect of feeding piglets a diet deficient or not in total sulfur amino acids (TSAA; Met1Cys)
on nitrogen retention and amino acid composition of proteins in different body compartments. Six blocks of three pigs each were
used in a combined comparative slaughter and nitrogen balance study. One piglet in each block was slaughtered at 42 days of
age, whereas the other piglets received a diet deficient or not in TSAA for 19 days and were slaughtered thereafter. Two diets
were formulated to provide either 0.20% Met and 0.45% TSAA (on a standardized ileal digestible basis) or 0.46% Met and 0.70%
TSAA. Diets were offered approximately 25% below ad libitum intake. At slaughter, the whole animal was divided into carcass,
blood, intestines, liver, and the combined head, tail, feet and other organs (HFTO), which were analyzed for nitrogen and amino
acid contents. Samples of the longissimus muscle (LM) were analyzed for myosin heavy chain (MyHC) and actin contents. Nitrogen
retention was 20% lower in piglets receiving the TSAA-deficient diet (P,0.01). In these piglets, the nitrogen content in tissue
gain was lower in the empty body, carcass, LM and blood (P,0.05) or tended to be lower in HFTO (P,0.10), but was not
different in the intestines and liver. The Met content in retained protein was lower in the empty body, LM and blood (P,0.05),
and tended to be lower in the carcass (P,0.10). The Cys content was lower in LM, but higher in blood of piglets receiving the
TSAA-deficient diet (P,0.05). Skeletal muscle appeared to be affected most by the TSAA deficiency. In LM, the Met content in
retained protein was reduced by 12% and total Met retention by more than 60%. The MyHC and actin contents in LM were not
affected by the TSAA content of the diet. These results show that a deficient TSAA supply affects the amino acid composition of
different body proteins. This questions the use of a constant ideal amino acid profile to express dietary amino acid requirements,
but also illustrates the plasticity of the animal to cope with nutritional challenges.
