The objective of the study was to determine the coefficients of ileal apparent digestibility (CIAD) of sorghum protein and amino
acids (AA) in weaned piglets and growing pigs. Digestibility coefficients were estimated using the regression and difference
methods for the weaned piglets; and the direct and difference methods for the growing pigs. To test the hypothesis that CP and
AA digestibility of sorghum is lower in weaned piglets than in growing pigs, two experiments were conducted. In experiment one,
20 weaned piglets were fitted with a ‘T’ cannula at 21 days of age and were fed for 2 weeks one of five dietary treatments: a
reference or control diet providing 200 g of CP/kg from casein (C) as the sole protein source, and four casein–sorghum (C–S) diets
kept isoproteic to C by the appropriate adjustment of C and maize starch proportions; the amount of sorghum (S) in these diets
was 135, 307, 460 and 614 g/kg. In experiment 2, fifteen castrated pigs weighing 57.862.8 kg were used and randomly allotted
to one of three dietary treatments: a reference casein–maize starch diet containing C as the sole protein source, a C–S diet, both
diets containing 160 g of CP/kg, and a fortified S diet containing 68 g of CP/kg. In piglets the CIAD for CP and AA decreased
linearly (P,0.05) as the amount of S in the diet increased. The average ileal digestibility of AA from C was 0.85860.111, and
decreased to 0.66360.191 at the higher S level. The CIAD estimated using the regression or difference methods were similar for
leucine, cysteine, glutamic acid, serine, alanine and tyrosine, and different for the other AA. In growing pigs the CIAD of protein
and AA (except alanine and cysteine) were similar (P.0.05) for the C and the C–S diets, but higher (P,0.05) than those for the
S diet. The CIAD for S obtained by the difference method were higher (P,0.05) than those obtained using the direct method,
except for lysine, isoleucine, valine, methionine, threonine and cysteine. The results indicate that except for lysine and cysteine,
growing pigs’ ability to digest AA and protein is superior than weaned piglets.
