To describe the pattern of prescribing for palivizumab in the Glasgow area over the period
1999 through 2007, and to compare recent prescribing to the current recommendations by the Joint Committee on
Vaccination and Immunisation of the United Kingdom Department of Health. Our secondary objective was to
describe admissions to paediatric intensive care in patients with respiratory syncytial virus receiving palivizumab.
Setting: Tertiary children’s hospital out-patient immunisation clinic and paediatric intensive care unit.
Design: Prospective analysis of prescribing and admissions data for the period 1999 through 2007. Outcome
measures: Number of prescriptions and admissions to the paediatric intensive care unit. Results: The number of
children receiving palivizumab annually initially rose more than 5-fold, from 17 in the season of 1999 and 2000
versus 115 in 2004 and 2005, although it has declined in the past 2 years, to 63 in 2006 and 2007, following
publication of the recommendations of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation established by the
United Kingdom Department of Health. There has been no significant change in demographics of patients during
this period. Prior to publication of these recommendations, 35 of 44 (80%) patients with congenitally malformed
hearts who received palivizumab in the season of 2005 and 2006 deviated from the current recommendations,
compared to 5 of 51 (10%) who received palivizumab for non-cardiac indications. No patients who received
palivizumab required admission to the paediatric intensive care unit with proven respiratory syncytial virus
infection over the 8 year period. Conclusions: The number of children receiving palivizumab initially increased
significantly, although it has now fallen following implementation of national recommendations. Much prescribing,
particularly for children with congenitally malformed hearts, did not fulfil current recommendations. The absence
of admissions to paediatric intensive care reflects the success of targeted immunisation in our population.

