Objective: To study the Parkinson´s disease system for Chinese medicine diagnosis based on database. Method: We will screen the Diagnosis factor and kinds of syndromes by using of modern mathematical or statistical methods and establish the respective database on the basis of the Modern Literature Research of the syndromes of Traditional Chinese Medicine of PD. The system is under the guidance of the theory of TCM. Result: According to the 52 literatures that are statisticed. There are 190 kinds of syndromes and 42 kinds of different syndromes. The most common syndromes of TCM about Parkinson´s Disease are yin deficiency of liver and kidney, deficiency of qi and blood, stirring wind due to phlegm-heat, qi stagnation and blooad stasis and endogenous wind. As the symptom analysis results, we can see that There are 151 kinds of different symptoms in the 52 literatures. Trembling, dyskinesia, pose abnormality, myotony are four main symptoms which appears most frequently. Except that, (Eliminates tongue, pulse condition) the frequency precedes mainly has dizziness, lack of power with limbs, insomnia and dreaminess, numbness of limbs, dim complexion, stupid vitality, anorexia, soreness and weakness of waist and knees, dry stool, tired spirits, spontaneous perspiration; red tongue, pale tongue, white musci, greasy fur are the most frequently tough images, while microsphygmy, wiry pulse, feeble pulse are the most prequently pulses. There are 96 kinds of symptoms to inquiry; 40 to inspection and 15 to Pulse-Taking and Palpation in all of the symptoms. lt will develop the minimum standards of diagnosis of syndromes of Traditional Chinese Medicine for PD ,which its features is under the guidance of the theory of TCM and emboding syndromes Differetiation of TCM theory, so that the syndromes Differetiation of Traditional Chinese Medicine have accomplished intelligence. Conclusion: The Prototype of this System that is concerned with the computer technique, intelligent informati- - on processing technology and Traditional Chinese Medicine theory is feasible and have accomplished intelligence.
