Background and Objective: Using of laryngeal mask air way (LMA) was recommended for air way management in short duration elective surgeries. One of its side effects is the increasing of secretion of air way and subsequently laryngospasm. Anticholinergic drugs (hyoscine NBB and atropine) have been administrated to reduce of these side effects. This study was carried out to compare the atropin and hyoscine n-butylbromide (NBB) on hemodynamic and nausea and vomiting in anesthesia with laryngeal mask air way.

Materials and Methods: In this randomized double- blind control trials, 100 patients (20-50 years) with class 1 and class 2 of Anesthesia, have been operated less than one hour under general anesthesia with LMA during 2007-08 in Beheshti hospital. These patients were divided to 2 groups every other one randomly with equal persons. After controlling the base of heart rate (HR) and mean arterial pressure (MAP), both groups was administrated to premed according weight. Then 0.5mg/5ml atropine to the first group and 10mg/5ml hyoscine NBB (Buscopan) to the second group was injected and hemodynamic was controlled after two minutes. Anesthesia with thiopental sodium was induced and LMA was inserted. Then hemodynamic was controlled during the time. The amount of secretions of air way was investigated according to the numbers of suction at the end of surgery and after removing of LMA. The severity of postoperative nausea and vomiting was assessed with attention to need of patients to antiemetic until 6 hours. Data was analyzed statistically.

Results: Antiemetic effect of atropin and hyoscine n-butylbromide (NBB) was similar. With mild secretions, moderate and sever antisialague effect of hyoscine NBB was 80%, 18% and 2% and in atropine group was 72%, 22% and 6% retrospectively. Heart rate increase (less of 20%) without rising MAP was obsered in two groups.

Conclusion: This study showed that the effects of hyoscine and atropine in decreasing airway secretions, nausea and vomiting is similar.
