Increasing worldwide environmental concerns have led to the development of environmentally friendly construction practices and Green roof technology is one possibility for reducing the environmental impact of a building. The main benefits of green roofs are their ability to regulate the temperature in and around buildings, improve energy efficiency in buildings, reduce the urban heat island effect, retain storm water, and increase the lifespan of a roof. Further, their secondary benefits include their ability to provide therapy to humans, provide space for agricultural use, improve public perception of a company or institution, improve the aesthetic environment, increase property value, reduce noise inside a building, and provide habitat for airborne species, However the main goal is always environmental quality enhancement. Sustainable structures and Green systems have been the most important issues for developed countries. Now these projects in developing countries like Iran have been doing for resolving several problems with cultural, social, environmental, and economical results. All of these efforts can be studied in base of sustainable development.

Study about green roof is not a new object but green system is a new object. If these systems be used in the country we can interest of these benefits and also many occupations will be created, so we should use them in macro scale otherwise they will be forgotten. One of the resolves of widespread green system performance is defining it in accordance with sustainable development. In today's society, sustaining the environment is becoming an increasingly important issue. Consumers, businesses and institutions are making an effort to be environmentally conscious for the sake of the planet. In addition, businesses and institutions have the incentive appearing more environmentally conscious to the public, and are beginning to forgo immediate economic gains for the sake of engaging in more environmentally sustainable activities and systems.

The investigation done has incorporated literature research, expert consultations and university information and has aggregated experiences of pioneer countries in this field. The objective of this study is to determine whether the environmental benefits and financial incentives of green roof systems in Iran are sufficient to render the green roof a sound investment. The purpose of this research is justifying the green roof system in Iran by using of environmental development criteria. In the conclusion we found that one way to develop and justify the system in Iran is defining and analyzing the ways of developing that by sustainable development criteria. The debate is over; human beings have to this point had an adverse effect on the stability of Earth. Many human practices and processes utilized to sustain the current standard of living have proven to be unsustainable. In light of this fact, the green revolution is gaining momentum throughout the world. A green roof is essentially a roof with a living system of plants on the top. In Iran, green roof technology has been slow to catch on. Green systems are minimal and more information needs to be relayed to people in order to stimulate green roof systems in Iran.
