BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ1O) is a provitamin existing in mitocondrial and cellular membranes scavenging free radicals as an antioxidant. This coenzyme also has important role in providing energy in cardiomyocites. Levels of CoQ1O decrease in heart failure. The treatment of severe congestive heart failure is one of the problems in cardiac patients. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of oral administration of CoQ1O in chronic heart failure.

METHODS: This quasi-experimental study was carried out on 47 patients with congestive heart failure (CLASS I1I-IV NYHA). In all patients MM, 2D, and Doppler echocardiography were performed and after that they received oral CoQ1O (100 mg) (red-CoQ1O) as daily single dose during next three months. After treatment, echocardiography was performed again and the data including left ventricle size, end systolic diameter, end diastolic diameter and severity of MR before and after treatment were compared and analyzed.

FINDINGS: The mean±SD was 60.5±12.8 years. Thirty patients (63.8%) were male and 17 patients (36.2%) were female. More than 10 mm decreases were observed in: left ventricle size (in 8.5%), end systolic diameter (in 12.8%), end diastolic diameter (in 19.1%) and increase in ejection fraction in 70.2% of patients that indicated significant differences as compared to before treatment (p=0.000). In dilated cardiomyopathy, more than 10 mm decreases were observed in: left ventricle size, end systolic diameter, and end diastolic diameter in 7.4%, 14.8% and 11.1% of patients, respectively. But in coronary artery disease, more than 10 mm decreases were observed in: left ventricle size, end systolic diameter, and end diastolic diameter in 9.1%, 18.2%, and 45.4% of patients, respectively. Increases in ejection fraction were 74.1% and 63.6% in dilated cardiomyopathy and coronary artery disease, respectively. CONCLUSION: Based on obtained results, supplementing patients' cardiac medicines with CoQ1O made significant improvements in ejection fraction. Additionally, the results of this study show that CoQ1O is effective in coronary artery disease.

