The aim of the study was to test the hypothesis that patterns of cross-Eurasian longitudinal
distribution of lotic mayflies are determined by species’ ecological requirements and the presence of the West
Siberian Lowland. In particular, the objective was to test whether this great lowland is an environmental
barrier preventing longitudinal dispersal of the rheophilic (i.e., preferring fast-running highland waters), but
not the potamophilic (i.e., preferring slow-current lowland waters) mayflies, as its entire territory contains no
rapidly-flowing streams suitable for rheophilic species. This hypothesis was tested indirectly by comparison
of altitudinal ranges of species characterised by different cross-Eurasian distribution patterns (mainly
East Palaearctic and Transpalaearctic species distributed over the Asian part of Palaearctica and entire
Palaearctica respectively). The material used for the analyses was collected in the centre of Eurasia, southwestern
Siberia, Russia. The region covered both lowland and mountain territories. The studied biogeographical
groups of mayflies have distinctly different altitudinal distribution: the Transpalaearctic species
inhabit lowland watercourses only, while the East Palaearctic species inhabit the entire altitudinal range with
most of the species preferring high elevations (on average 700 m a.s.l.). These results confirmed the stated
hypothesis and showed that for most of the East Palaearctic (but not Transpalaearctic) species the West
Siberian Lowland can be an environmental barrier preventing their westward dispersal and therefore precluding
mixing of the East and West Palaearctic rheophilic faunas. However, possible alternative hypotheses cannot
be ruled out, as altitudinal ranges of some of these species do not fall out of the elevation range of the
West Siberian Lowland. Remarkably, the East Palaearctic species, which by definition have narrower distribution
than the Transpalaearctic species, have broader altitudinal ranges than the Transpalaearctic species. This
pattern is related to the altitudinal Rapoport effect recently detected for mayfly distribution over the river
systems.
