 Objective: With progress of technology, the necessity for use electromagnetic waves in various instrumentations in human societies is becoming increasingly wide spread. On the other hand, the effect of electromagnetic fields on living organisms is one of the problems of advanced societies. The aim of this study was to assess the effects of electromagnetic field on spermatogenesis and the role of epinephrine as a protective agent in rats 
Materials and Methods: for this purpose, a machine was designed which produced an electromagnetic wave of 120 Gausses (12 mT) intensities. Wister rat was chosen as a laboratorial animal model. The rats were divided into five groups (n= 25 each). The first group was used for determination of LD50 of epinephrine. The second received the selected epinephrine sub-lethal dose from previous experiment. The third group received saline (control). The fourth group was exposed to electromagnetic wave and received epinephrine. The fifth group was exposed to electromagnetic wave and received normal saline. After dissecting out the testis histo-pathological assessment of the testis were made which entailed evaluation of the number of spermatogonia cells, primary spermotocytes, spermatozoids, interstitial cells and sertoli cells.
Results: The results showed a significant reduction (P<0.05) in the number of spermotogonia cells, spermatid and sperm and also significant increase (P<0.05) in number of primary spermatocyte in the group that was exposed to electromagnetic field in comparison with control group. Administration of epinephrine protected the testis from the changes that followed exposure to electromagnetic field and this group did not show these changes in comparison with control group. 
Conclusion: It seems that electromagnetic field, by promoting free radical production, can cause damage to existing cells in epithelium germinal layer of testis and epinephrine can have a protective effect on the electromagnetic wave possibly by constriction of blood vessels. This hypothesis needs to be assessed in further studies. 
