Objective: Children, especially in developing countries, are a vulnerable group. Therefore attention to hygienic issues related to this group is crucially importance. One parameter that can be used to assess the health status of children is the anthropometric pattern of growth. However, since no standard anthropometric pattern is available in our area and normally NCHS is used as a standard curve for assessment of growth, this standard may not directly related to our children in this area.  In the presented study we aim to determine the anthropometric curves of infant under two years old in Ahvaz city. 
Subjects and Methods: This cross sectional study was carried out in year 1382 (2003). The data were collected from five health centers of Ahvaz city (Central, Northern, Southern, Eastern and Western). Six hundred health files of children having the inclusion criteria, born in 1378, excluding twines, premature births and LBW, were randomly selected. The data analyzed using SPSS software. 
Results: There was a significant difference in mean weight between boys and girls (P<0.001), with mean weight boys, from birth until two years of age, was greater than in girls. The average height was also significantly higher (P<0.001) in boys relative to girls for all age groups. Comparing percentile weight of boys with that of NCHS in the age range of 0 to 22 months, the standard the difference was significant (P<0.001). Comparing the percentile mean height of girl with those of NCHS, except for 12 month and 18 month, was significantly  different (P<0.001). Comparing distribution of weight amplitude in accordance to NCHS standard for two genders and in the age range of 0 to 22 months (expect at birth birth), the difference was significant (P<0.001). Comparing distribution of height amplitude in accordance to NCHS standard for Ahvazian boys and girls, in the age range of 0 to 22 months (expect at birth and at 22 months of age) the difference was meaningful (P<0.001).
Conclusion: The results of the study underline the necessity of a fundamental solution for acquiring local growth curves which are based on genetic and regional patterns in order to examine the situation of  infant  more precise
