Objective: The Metabolic Triad (TM) is known as a predisposing factor for cardiovascular events. It seems that hypertryglyceridemia and high waist circumference can predict metabolic triad. In this study the relationship between hypertriglycemic waist with other cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk factors in women in the central areas of Iran was assessed. 
Methods & Materials: Data prepare from phase I of Isfahan Healthy Hearth Project through a descriptive cross-sectional study. Random-cluster sampling method was used. Blood samples, lipid profile and blood sugar of samples were determined. Waist circumference, height, weight and blood pressure of participants were measured and their body mass index was calculated. Participants were allocated into 4 groups based on the triglyceride and waist circumference: TgHWH group (TG³165 mg/dl, waist circumference ³88 cm), TgHWL group (TG³165 mg/dl, waist circumference<88 cm), TgLWL group (TG<165 mg/dl, waist circumference<88 cm) and TgLWH group (TG<165 mg/dl, waist circumference>88 cm). Variance test was used to compare the variables in a group. ANOVA test and X2 test were used to study the prevalence of risk factors of groups. Post hoc Tukey test was used for testing different between groups.
Results: A total of 6279 women were included in this study. After deleting the effect of age, results showed that in TgHWH group the levels of cholesterol, LDL, triglyceride, blood pressure, body mass index and blood sugar were higher and HDL was lower than other groups. Furthermore, the prevalence of risk factors in this group was significantly higher than groups. On the other hand, the prevalence of risk factors was lower in TgLWH group than in other groups. 
Conclusion: TG and waist circumference can be used as the predictor for risk factors in large population in which the measurement of all risk factors is difficult. Furthermore hypertryglyceridemia is more important risk factor than high waist because the CVD risk factors are moderately low in TGLWH group. 
