Background and objective: Brucellosis is still an important health problem and endemic in most parts of the world such as middle east,latin america , and etc.

Sevral studies have carried in the field of Brucellosis in many countries. The finding accesible of better methods for diagnosis of brucellosis is the idea of most researchers all over the world. Our objective is detection of value of IgG Elisa test for the diagnosis of suspected cases.

Materials and methods: The patient who reffered the chlinics of EMAM and SINA hospital or admitted in the infectious disease wards were included in over study. There patient had no prediction creatria for age and sex. First the physician offered conventional test for brucella (wright, coombs wright) and one sample send for IgG Elisa test. In cases that Standard Agglutination test (SAT) was not diagnostic and the titer were less 1/160, second serum sample were taken two weeks latter. For better data analysis we used the highest titers agglutination test (wright or coomb's wright) and also hoghest titer for IgG Elisa in every cases.

Results: Out of 80 patients, 28 patients showed positive serology, 8 cases showed sigificant antibodies against brucellae either by SAT or IgG Elisa. Unfortunately there was no postive blood culture. From 18 remaining samples, 15 cases, dispite revealing lower and insignificant agglutination titers, various titer of IgG Elisa.

In 3 remaning cases SAT showed higher titer than 1/160 but Elisa was completely negative. Sensitivity and specifity of Elisa test were 72% and 78% respectively.

Conclusion: IgG Elisa has limited and lesser value in diagnosis of suspected brucella. Cases It may be helpful on evaluation of treatment for diagnostic decision in saspected brucella cases. IgG Elisa test alone may be helpful in evaluation of relapse or chronic cases and fallow up of chronic cases. We recommned at least performing simultaneous IgG and IgM Elisa test. Perhaps test alone IgG Elisa helpful in evaluation treatment and decision in cases relaps or chronic patient.
