Introduction: Pemphigus is a chronic autoimmune bullous dermatosis that predominantly was affected middle aged peoples. It requires serious therapeutic management and often repeated hospitalizations. However, little formally investigation has been performed concerning Heath-Related Quality of Life (HRQL) of patients who were affected by this disorder.

Objective: Determining and comparing the Health-Related Quality of Life in patients suffering from pemphigus with healthy people.

Materials and Methods: In this cross-sectional study 76 patients who confirmed pemphigus disease and 86 their healthy accompaniers were assessed. Two sample groups were paired according to sex and age.This study was performed in Razi hospital's dermatological clinic in Rasht. A questionnaire composed of Persian translations of SF-36 and Sweden QoL (Quality of Life) were used for measuring of HRQL after determining of its validity and reliability. Data were collected and analyzed by using descriptive (distribution, mean ± SD) and inferential (t-test, chi-square, fisher exact test, ANOVA and Multivariant Regression Analysis). Results: In the pemphigus group there was a significant decrease of mean scores of all HRQL dimentions (p<0.0001). (Mean ± SD of patient's group was 69.38 ± 11.81 in Comparision to 85.43 ± 6.64 of healthy people). The factors influencing this impact were: job (PO.Ol), older age group (P<0.04), prolonged disease(P<0.008), type of treatment (steroid+ adjuvant) (P<0.001),lack of university educations (P<0.005) and repeated Hospitalizations (P<0.001).Multivariate regression analysis indicated that level of education(p<0.002), repeated hospitalization (p<0.001) and type of treatment (steroid+adjuvant) (p<0.001) have significant effects on quality of life in pemphigus patients.

Conclusion: This study confirmed that pemphigus is responsible for great alteration in HRQL. Therefore, in management of this disease must be taken its impacts on various fields of life of the patients. Undoubtedly, every effort to warn health and economic managers would play a significant role in resolving of problems of these patients.
