Introduction: A wide variety of rehabilitation procedures can be applied in opiate dependents. Ultra Rapid Opiate Detoxification (UROD) is one of them resulted in ich influenced in detoxification in few hours; however, the efficacy and safety of this procedure are questionable.

Objective: Survey the Prevalence of Recurrence in Ultra Rapid Opiate Detoxification in Opiate and Heroin Dependents

Materials and Methods: In this descriptive study, ninety opiate addicts who referred to Shafa Hospital were selected to undergo UROD. First, they were interviewed by principal investigators using ASI questionnaire. Urinary opium screen test was performed a week before detoxification and immediately after it. Subjective Opiate Withdrawal Scale (SOWS) and Objective Opiate Withdrawal Scale (OOWS) were applied before detoxification and 1, 6, 24 hours after that to assess withdrawal symptoms and signs. 6-month relapse was evaluated by urine screening test. Data was analyzed by SPSS statistical software.

Results: 13 cases of 90 subjects failed to be followed. Among 77 remaining patients, 60(78%) relapsed in one-year. 50% relapsed in the first 3 months, 18% between 3 to 6 months, 6% between 6 months to one year and 3% after one year. Between subjective symptoms shaking, nausea and cramps in stomach and in objective signs vomiting and abdominal cramps were significantly different before and after detoxification. Prevalence of subjective and objective withdrawal symptoms and sings was significantly higher after detoxification. Conclusion: In detoxified Patients who under went UROD, didn't find any considerable side effects due to anesthesia, organ function and severe psychiatric problems were not found. Of course, all of the subjects did not have any physical problem before UROD. UROD was effective to control some of the symptoms and signs of withdrawal syndrome while it did not show efficacy in controlling some others. The relative frequency of relapse rate in detoxified patientsby UROD was 78% which was notably high.

