Introduction & objective: Despite of young and adolescence intent to the boxing sport, because of dominant aggression and direct blows contact to head, face and central nervous system, it is continuously criticize by different groups. The groups of sporting and physician conventions are distinguished boxing with physical and neuropsychological disorders and some groups believe that side effects of this sport are not more than other sports. For this base the aim of this study was to determine the chronic traumatic brain injury in a group amateur boxers. Materials & Methods: In a case-control study, three groups of sport men were considered, each group contained 20 randomly selected cases. The first group were amateur boxers with 4 years rtninimal activity(directly has been presented to the head blows), second group were amateur soccer players with 4 years minimal activity(has been presented to the not very severe head blows), third group were non athlete subjects .The groups were matched in weight, height, age and education .To understand brain disorder interview by medicine method has been used, then Wiskancin, Bonardele, Bender geshtalt, Kim karad visual memory, Benton and wechler memory (Alef type) tests has been performed and EEG has got in the same hour and condition.

Results: The homogeneity of between group variances was gained by the statistical method. Also between structural-visual abilities neuropsychological aspect in groups, significant difference has been gained (p= 0/000). In Kim karad visual memory test at the mild and long term visual memory deficit, significant differences between three groups was observed (P= 0.000, P=0.009) that least score has been belonged to the boxers. Also in boxers 6 abnormal EEGs is observed.

Conclusion: It can be said that of four years amateur boxing can affect on boxers visual and memory perception and their spatial orientation. Additionally our study have showed that amateur boxing has a significant relation with traumatic brain injury.

