Conformation scores can account for more than 20% of cattle price variation at Australian livestock sales. However, there are
limited available references which define genetic factors relating objective live developmental traits to carcass composition.
Weaning and post-weaning weight, height, length, girth, muscle (ratio of stifle to hip width) and fat depth of 1202 progeny from
mature Hereford cows (637) mated to seven sire breeds (Jersey, Wagyu, Angus, Hereford, South Devon, Limousin and Belgian
Blue) were examined for growth and development across ages. Crossbred Wagyu and Jersey were both lighter in weight and
smaller in size (height, length and girth) than purebred Hereford and crossbred Angus, South Devon, Limousin and Belgian Blue.
Within the five larger crossbreds, there were significant changes in relative weight from weaning to 600 days. Sire breeds differed
in fat depth, with Angus being the fattest (9% on average fatter than Hereford and Wagyu), and Jersey 5% less fat than
Hereford, followed by South Devon and Limousin (19% lower than Hereford) and Belgian Blue (39% lower than Hereford). Direct
heritability ranged from 19 to 42% and was higher than the proportion of total phenotypic variance accounted for by maternal
effects (which ranged from 0 to 17%) for most body measurement traits except for weight (38 v. 18%) and girth (36 v. 9%) traits
at weaning, an indication of maternal effect on some body conformation traits at early ages. Muscularity (19 to 44%) and fat
depth (26 to 43%) were moderately to highly heritable across ages. There were large differences for growth and the objective
measures of body development between crossbreds with a degree of overlap among the progeny of the seven sire breeds. The
variation between genetic (positive) and environmental (negative) correlations for dry versus wet season average daily gains in
weight and fat, suggested the potential use of live-animal conformation traits for within breed selection of genetically superior
animal in these traits across seasons.
