The objective was to determine the concentration of total selenium (Se) and the proportion of total Se comprised as
selenomethionine (SeMet) and selenocysteine (SeCys) in post mortem tissues of lambs in the 6 weeks period following the
withdrawal of a diet containing high-dose selenised yeast (HSY), derived from a specific strain of Saccharomyces cerevisae
CNCM (Collection Nationale de Culture de Micro-organism) I-3060. Thirty Texel3Suffolk lambs used in this study had
previously received diets (91 days) containing either HSY (6.30 mg Se per kg dry matter (DM)) or an unsupplemented control
(C; 0.13 mg Se per kg DM). Following the period of supplementation, all lambs were then offered a complete pelleted diet,
without additional Se (0.15 mg Se per kg DM), for 42 days. At enrolment and 21 and 42 days later, five lambs from each
treatment were blood sampled, euthanased and samples of heart, liver, kidney and skeletal muscle (longissimus dorsi and
psoas major) tissue were retained. Total Se concentration in whole blood and tissues was significantly (P,0.001) higher in
HSY lambs at all time points that had previously received long-term exposure to high dietary concentrations of SY. The
distribution of total Se and the proportions of total Se comprised as SeMet and SeCys differed between tissues, treatment
and time points. Total Se was greatest in HSY liver and kidney (22.64 and 18.96 mg Se per kg DM, respectively) and SeCys
comprised the greatest proportion of total Se. Conversely, cardiac and skeletal muscle (longissimus dorsi and psoas major)
tissues had lower total Se concentration (10.80, 7.02 and 7.82 mg Se per kg DM, respectively) and SeMet was the predominant
selenised amino acid. Rates of Se clearance in HSY liver (307 mg Se per day) and kidney (238 mg Se per day) were higher
compared with HSY cardiac tissue (120 mg Se per day) and skeletal muscle (20 mg Se per day). In conclusion, differences in
Se clearance rates were different between tissue types, reflecting the relative metabolic activity of each tissue, and appear to
be dependent on the proportions of total Se comprised as either SeMet or SeCys.
