Transplantation is transferring a cell tissue or a living organ from one
person to another in a way that the function of the transferred organ remains
the same. Nowadays Allograph transplantation products are some of the best
and sometimes the only treatment of some diseases. These organs and
tissues are taken from people whose brain death has been testified by
physicians. Removing organs and tissues will be possible through the
person's will and consent (legal will, organ donation card, informing the
family while he is alive or the consent of legal heirs). In our country due to a
large number of brain deaths, one may expect a lot of organdonation s, but
it's not true.
The process of organ donation as a social action is under the influence of
so many factors like Cultural and Social variables. It's impassible to try to
solve the shortage of transplanting organs without knowing about the
reasons and barriers against organ donation.
This study aims at a cultural and social analysis of organ donation. In
order to fulfill the objective of the research, a combined conceptual
framework with and emphasis on Parson's social action theory has been
arranged after reviewing sociological, logical, legal and religious perspectives
and also reviewing empirical resources, according to which research
hypotheses have been proposed. After defining concepts and maintaining
suitable measures, their validity and reliability were tested. Finally, there is a
questionnaire which has been prepared via referring to control participants.
The statistical sample is 320 persons of Tehranian Muslim citizens who are
over 15 years of age which comprise two groups. One group is donating
tissue and organ (with organ donation card) and anther group do not donate.
The description and analysis of data has been done in three levels.
Descriptive statistics has been used in one-variable situation analysis
(one-dimensional tables and distribution figures). Inferential statistics has
been used for the analysis of two-dimensional tables. Regression has been
used in multi-variable analysis. The findings of the study show that organ
donation is related to the individual characteristics such as: age, sex, gain of
physical health, social features socio-economic status, personality,
Universalism. People's attitude towards donation and social trust as the out
put of personality trait. The more literacy, the more knowledge of the
subject, universalism, trust and positive attitude towards organ donation, the
more willingness to donate organs. In contrast, the more gain of health, age
and social status, the less organ donation.
Findings of the regression analysis also show that, trust in medical
profession and universalism play the most important in determining organ
donation in regression model, respectively It's note worthy that the rest of
the variables such as age, physical health gain, altitude, sex, socio-economic
status are the next most important factors.
