Background and Objective: The prevalence of obesity and cardiovascular diseases in the world
has prompted production oflow-fat and low-trans-fatty acid margarine-like products or low-fat and
low-trans spreads. An increase in water content of such products can affect their sensory
characteristics and shelf-life. The aim of this study was sensory evaluation and shelf-life
detcrrnination of low-fat and low-trans spread samples produced at a laboratory scale.
Materials and Methods: Six samples of low-fat (40%) and low-trans «1 %) spreads were
produced at a laboratory scale (2kg) by combining three oil phases and two stabilizers, i.e., F, and
F, formulas with palm stearin and canota oils (40:60) and sodium alginate (F,), or modified waxy
maize starch or MWMS (F2) ; F3 and F4 formulas with fully hydrogenated soybean oil (flake) and
soybean oil (25:75) and sodium alginate (F]), or MWMS (F,); F, and Fo formulas with palm,
cottonseed and canola oils (40:40:20) with sodium alginate (Fe), or MWMS (Fg), and full fat spread
or Fl (80%fat) with palm stearin and canola oils (40:60), without stabilizer. as a control. Sensory
evaluation (surface texture, spreadabiliry. flavour and mouth feel, and overall acceptance) was
carried out by 30 in-house panelists (ranking method). Shelf-life of the spread samples stored in
refrigerator (5°C) was determined by measuring peroxide value, oiling off and microbial
characteristics (total aerobic bacterial count, and mold and yeast counts).
Results: There were significant differences among the samples as regards overall acceptance
(p<0.05). Sensory evaluation showed similar results for F2 and Fl , and samples with MWMS had
better acceptance compared to samples containing sodium alginate. Peroxide value did not reach
the discard point (5meq/kg), even after 10 weeks of storagc. Results of oiling off tests were
satisfactory for most samples; oiling off was found only in F, and F" after six weeks of storage. All
samples reached the discard point after 10 weeks of storing at 5°C, taking into account total
bacterial and mold and yeast counts.
Conclusion: The final ranking of the spread samples based on the nutritional value (P/S+ T),
physical characteristics. sensory evaluation and shelf-life was as follows: Fl>F,>F,>F6>Fj>F3>F,.
Considering the necessity of production of low-fat and low-trans-fatty acid products from a
nutritional and public health point of view, the F, formula is recommended for further research.
