Background and Objective: Few studies have investigated the association between dietary
patterns and socioeconomic and demographic factors. The aim of this study was to detect major
dietary patterns and assess their relationship with socioeconomic and demographic factors among
20-50 year-old women living in the north of Tehran.
Materials and methods: In this cross-sectional study 460 women, aged 20-50 year-old, living in
the north of Tehran were selected by stratified random sampling. Dietary data (for the previous
year) was collected by a semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaire, and information on the
socioeconomic and demographic factors was obtained by interview. Factor analysis was used for
identifying major dietary patterns. The association between major dietary patterns and
socioeconomic and demographic factors was assessed by covariance analysis.
Results: Two major dietary patterns were detected: 1. Healthy Pattern (high in, fruits; yellow
vegetables, cruciferous vegetables, tomatoes and other vegetables; yogurt drink and low-fat dairy
products; poultry; olives; nuts; fruitjuice; potatoes; garlic; coffee; dried fruits: and legumes), and 2.
Unhealthy Pattern (high in processed meat; mayonnaise; soft drinks; sweets; refined grains; snacks;
industrial juice; red meat; nuts; French fries; hydrogenated fats; egg.. butter and high-fat dairy
products; sugars; and organ meats). After adjustmnent for confounders, the Azari ethnic group in
comparison with the Fars ethnic group (B~ 0.44; p<O.O I), and living in District 7 in comparison
with living in District 3 (B~ 0.39; p<0.05) were positively, and age (B= - 0.04; p<O.OI), university
education (B= -0.34; p<0.05) and total monthly family income (B= - 0.25; p<0.05) negatively,
associated with the unhealthy diatery pattern.On the other hand, age (B= 0.03; p<O.OI) and housing
surface area (square meters_ per head) (B~ 0.21: p<O.OI) had a positive, and duration of residence
in Tehran, a negative, association with the healthy pattern (B= - 0.01; p<O.OI).
Conclusion: Socioeconomic and demographic factors influence dietary patterns of the women. It is
suggested that these factors be considered in the future assessments of associations between dietary
patterns and disease.
