Background and objective: Zinc (Zn) is an essential trace clement found in a wide spectrum of
metalloenzymes.. It participates in many metabolic processes. including normal metabolism of
vitamin A. On the other hand. vitamin A affects zinc absorption and utilization, Recent
investigation has shown that vitamin A plays a role in the secretion of insulin by the pancreas.
There is evidence that the metabolism of zinc and vitamin A is altered in type I diabetes mellitus
(OM), The objective of the present study was to investigate the effects of simultaneous zinc and
vitamin A supplementation on serum lipoproteins. apoproteins A-I and B and glycemic status in
patient with type 10M.
Materials and methods: Fifty-two 7-20 year-old patients with at least 2 years of OM history. not
suffering from any other metabolic disease. and not taking any medicine. but under insulin
treatment. participated in a 12-week randomized double-blind clinical trial. They were divided •
.after matching for sex. age and DM duration, into 2 groups: a Zn- and vitamin A-supplemented
group (10 mg Zn-sulfate syrup per day and halfofa 25000-IU vitamin A tablet every other day) and
a control group (taking a zinc and vitamin A placebo), Forty-eight patients completed the study,
Nutrients intakes were estimated using a 24-hour recall and analyzed by Food Processor III . The serum
contents of total cholesterol (TC). low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LOL-c). high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol (HOL-e), triglyceride (TG). apoproteins R and A-I. fasting blood sugar
(FRS). insulin. and glycosylated hemoglobin (lIbA Ic) were determined at the beginning and at the
end of the trial. The independent sample t-tcst was used for comparisons between the two groups
and the paired sample t-tcst was used to compare the differences between different time points in
each group. A P-value S 0.05 was considered significant.
Results: The final mean serum TC. TG, LOL-c. HOL-c. FBS. insulin. HbAlc and apoprotein B
values were not significantly different between the 2 groups. As compared to the control value. only
the apoprotein AI level significantly increased in the experimental group (p<O,OOO I).
Conclusion: It seems that simultaneous zinc and vitamin A supplementation may Increase the
serum ApoAvl level, which can reduce the atherogenic risk factor in patients with type 10M.
