The Seventh IEEE and IFIP International Conference on wireless and Optical communications Networks (WOCN2010) invites high-quality recent research results in the areas of Mobile and Wireless Communications, optical communications and networking, architectures, protocols, planning and design, management and operation and Information Technologies. The main goal of this annual conference is to bring together scientists and engineers who work in these fields in different geographical locations. The seventh IEEE and IFIP International Conference WOCN2010 will be held in Colombo, Sri Lanka 6, 7 and 8th of September, 2010. WOCN2010 is the seventh conference in its series aimed at stimulating technical exchange in the emerging and important field of Optical, mobile and wireless communications and networks. WOCN2010 seeks to address and capture highly innovative and state of the art research and work in the wireless and Optical industries. The scope of the conference includes a wide range of technical challenges in view of the growing interest for wireless access to Internet and the evolution of third and fourth generation wireless and cellular systems included ITU IMT/UMTS. The conference also accepts progress on IST European Commission funded research projects. The Authors can present their finding on wireless quality of service, resource management, Ad Hoc and sensor networks. Radio interface design, adaptive antennas and arrays and indoor propagation, measurement and predictions also will be considered. A growing number of digital devices inside homes and the application of Ultra Wide Band (UWB), as well as Spectrum efficiency and low power consumption including low cost and secure wireless personal access are some of the areas to be considered in this conference. Optical communications networks are becoming increasingly important as the demand for high capacity links are required. Dense wavelength division multiplexing (DWDM) is widely deployed at the core networks to a- - ccommodate high capacity transport systems. Optical components, such as optical amplifier, tunable filters, transceivers, termination devices and add-drop Multi-Plexers are becoming more affordable and reliable. Access and metropolitan area networks are increasingly built with optical technologies to overcome the electronic bottleneck at network edges. New components and subsystems for high-speed optical networks offer new design options. The objective of this event is therefore to foster the exchange of information among researchers in this fast-moving field. The authors can present their finding on new Fibers, optical fiber gratings and devices, optical amplifiers, optical sensing and medical application of fiber optics and Opto-Electronics, Nano-photonics, Bio-photonics and microwave over optics.
