Background:  Development of human capital within the healthcare organizations is of vital importance due to their dealing with health and lives of people. 
Objective: The aim of this study was to recognize the main factors affecting the Human Capital Development in hospitals affiliated to Iran social security organization.
Methods: This was a descriptive and applicable study carried out within the hospitals affiliated to Iran social security organization .in 2010. Initially, a conceptual model was designed based on comparative study of Human Capital Development models which was later confirmed by a group of expert. In addition, a questionnaire was designed based on conceptual models of components and variants and filled out by the organization’s Education authorities (n=68) in two stages with a 20-day interval to assess the current state of the Human Capital Development. After determining the adequacy of sample volume by Kaiser Meyer Olkin method and meaningfulness of coefficient matrix with Bartlott test, the exploration factors analysis using maximum probable method as well as the interpretation of variants by Varimax method were performed. Later, to confirm the acquired factors verifying factor analysis and to determine the direct and indirect relationships of components, the structural equations model method was used.
Findings: Factors-related commitment component (organization development and management commitment) showed a direct relationship with   planning component (career development path and plan for education). The factors of career development path and master plan for education demonstrated a bilateral relationship in which a direct correlation between these factors and the factors of Human Capital Development (education and personal development) was established. Also, it was found that the Evaluation factor is an effective independent factor influencing all other factors.
Conclusion: The factors recognized in this research are suitable for   Human Capital Development in hospitals affiliated to Iran social security organization.

