The Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) is a united state non-profit medical
research institute based in Chevy Chase, Maryland. It was founded by an American
magnate Howard Hughes in 1953.This institute is one of the largest private funding
organization for biological and medical research in the united state. HHMI's principal
mission is conducting basic biomedical research in the fields of genetics ,
immunology and rapidly growing field of molecular biology, which it carries out in
collaboration with more than 60 universities, medical centers and other research
institute throughout the United States. The primary purpose and objective of Howard
Hughes medical institute shall be the promotion of human knowledge within the field
of the basics science and the effective application thereof for the benefit of mankind.
The institute has an endowment of $17.5 billion , making it the second wealthiest
philanthropic organization in the united state, and the second best endowed medical
research foundation in the world. Discoveries made in Howard hugs laboratories are
fundamentally changing the way we view the world. The institute is an operating
medical research organization - not a foundation. This means that it carries out
research with its own scientific teams. The HHMI researchers are widely recognized
for creativity and productivity including 124 National Academy of Sciences members
and 13 Nobel Prize winners within the investigator community. Investigators have
the freedom to explore and, if necessary, to change direction in their research.
Moreover, they have support to follow their ideas through to fruition - even if that
process takes a very long time. This institute has also allocated some research grants
for individuals and science education grants for institutions. Also there are some
online resources of this institute for people. There is an HHMI-NIH research scholar program for students. HHMI has recently completed building a new research campus
called janelia farm research campus.
