The most important constituent elements of Suhrawardi's Illuminationist Philosophy are Iran and Shi'ism. There is a hot debate among those who study him as to whether his philosophy follows his political thought, or whether his politics is rooted in his Illuminationist philosophy. The truth is that Suhrawardi is the only Islamic philosopher who has developed an objective and synthetic philosophy which cannot be understood without perceiving his political thoughts. In this paper, the writer has tried to show that Suhrawardi's political thought is influenced by his Illuminationist philosophy; however, one must admit that these two fields are so tightly intertwined in his synthetic philosophy that it is extremely difficult to draw a distinct borderline between them.

The questions that might arise at this point are: why did Suhrawardi turn to Illuminationist philosophy? Was it because of his political thoughts? The course of his journeys from Zanjan to Maraghah, Isfahan, Mardin, Diyar Bakr, and Halab reveal the existence of some Batini and gnostic tendencies in Suhrawardi. Is this
accidental? We should not ignore the fact that he wrote his Hikmat al-ishraq and developed his political philosophy between 578-587 AH (the time of his murder) in lands dominated by Batini thoughts.

However, the degree of Illuminationist Philosophy's influence on Suhrawardi's politics, or vise versa, has attracted the attention of the scholars who study this philosopher, and each has viewed this issue from a different perspective. Suhrawardi maintains that the end of his political-Illuminationist design is reaching a luminous period and society which is far from darkness and has no meaning without a philosopher possessing a dhawqi (related to gnostic intuition) and discourive wisdom. Unlike Farabi, he does not unite politics with the city and its types and says no word about virtues, administration, and justice. His political method is based on Illuminationist philosophy, "divine administration", connection to the "Unseen World", and "inspirations from the superior world". Therefore, the only true politics in his philosophy is one which is governed by "God's command", and in which the "Divine order" is dominant.

Suhrawardi's political philosophy is completely different from Greek philosophy and is based on Islamic and Iranian thoughts and principles, i.e. prophethood, the miracles and charismatic acts of the prophets and the members of the Prophet's Household, and the glory and nobility or Iranian Kings. Therefore, he is the founder of Islamic-Iranian politics among Islamic philosophers.

