Todays, focus on environment is important, in particular the rural areas, as human try simultaneously to use from nature and to preserve it. Since the villages are near to nature, there are direct relationship between nature and the villages. Therefore they have direct affect from its environment, which is considered as important point in environmental studies. It also shows that why study of rural environment is very important.  
The objective of this study is to explore and resolve these problems. The methodology of this study was through library and internet search to obtain information on other countries and their activities on rural environment.
 The finding in this regard was that the erosion, lack of center for waste burial and sewage systems are considered as important problems. There are also other important problems that might be necessary to focus on it, for example land use changes, water and air pollution and destroy of the preserved land. This paper, for decreasing the environmental problems in the villages, it  propose that to increase productivity of water resources by improving water network supply system and also to carry out physical development in villages. Also it is essential to increase the productivity by using the existing resources.
Another problem in the villages is related to befoul (for example, wood). This causes air pollution in/out home. One of the way to resolve this problem is to supply of electricity into the villages. This helps to decrease carbon monoxide. 
Population is another component that has positive and negative effects on rural environment. High population and immigration would destroy the rural environment, but, at the same time these crowds can also develop the environmental friendly technology which could protect the environment.
In the world, there are some projects Implemented in the rural areas, such as land use management, training, environment management and public participation approach. Which are toward protection of rural environment. 

