Background and objective: Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is among the most serious health problems of the 21st century. People have a little information about it, therefore increasing people's knowledge and replacing their unhealthy behavior by a healthy one is of important consideration. High school students includes of groups who are at risk of Aids. The objective of the present study was to determine Torbat Heydariyeh high school students' knowledge and attitude to Aids.

Materials and methods: This study was a descriptive, analytic study. The population study was all of the students who were studying in high schools of Torbat Heydariyeh. This study was conducted with 800 high school students (499 female, 301 male) for the purpose of determining their knowledge and attitudes about Aids. Samples were selected by multistage sampling. Information was collected via a special designed questionnaire containing 26 questions for evaluating the level of knowledge and 10 questions for evaluating the level of attitude. Statistical analysis was performed using Mann-Whitney, Kruskal-Wallis, and Chi-square and Pearson Correlation Coefficient tests with SPSS software.

Results: The level of knowledge of 59.2% students was good (true responses to more than 75% of items), 39% was moderate (true responses to 50- 74% of items) and only 1.8% had weak knowledge (true responses to less than 50% of items).

Girls had higher level of knowledge than boys (p < 0.02). High school students had higher Mean Rank than industrial students (p<0.001). Experimental curse students had also higher level of knowledge than others (p < 0.001). Television was the most common means of obtaining information about Aids. There was a direct, significant correlation between amount of knowledge and attitude, with higher knowledge leading to more positive attitude.

Conclusion: Overall, The level of knowledge and attitude of high school students about Aids was good. Because of the television had the most effect on Aids, it is important to emphasize on its role. Then improve quality of television of programs and any other souses especially schools are needed.
