Background and objective: Cystic echinococcosis (hydatidosis) is the cause of major public health and economic problems in many rural areas of Iran. Livestock-related economic losses are estimated to reach several million dollars annually in eastern Mediterranean region and are the result of decreased weight gain, reduced milk and wool production and loss of infected viscera. Among the human population, 4000 to 5000 cases of hydatidosis are reported in the Region every year. The objective of this paper is to review the current situation of hydatidosis in human and animal population during 5 years in Iran.

Material and methods: In this Cross sectional study, the total number of animal slaughters and infected organs in slaughterhouses in country was recorded as well as the incidence of human hydatidosis separately in 28 province of Iran during 2002-2006. Data analysis was performed by Excel and SPSS packages.

Results: We found that the average of infection was 6/73% during 5 years in slaughtered animals. From 63851561 animal, 4298882 liver and lung excluded from consumption chain. Infection rate in lung was 1/8 time more than livers in animals. From 28 province, Khorasan and Yazd had highest and lowest rate of infection (18/7 and 2/4% respectively).Economic losses was estimated 76 billion Rials. The incidence of human hydatidosis in 5 year of investigation was 0.61 per 100000 population. Khorasan had the highest incidence (29/5 percent of total cases) and Hormozgan with any case had the lowest rate. Pearson Correlation between animal and human of disease was significant(r=.47, p=.01).

Conclusion: Control of zoonoses constitutes an important health matter. The main factor contributing to persistence of echinococcosis are large shepherd dog populations; uncontrolled disposal of offal and other slaughter wastes. Prevention of hydatidosis in humans primarily involves regular de-worming of dogs, the definitive hosts. Keeping dogs away from areas with infected viscera (e.g. abattoirs) is also important.

