Introduction: The main mission of management is accessing more efficient which be taken into care by managers for managing and new engineering. Today human efficient is the most common of managers' concerned. Many factors are effective in promoting human efficient that cannot be identifying all of them. So we have to give an advantage model. Using factor analysis is one of the efficient models. Objective: To determine the components of effective manpower productivity, using factor analysis. Materials and Methods: This Descriptive, analytic and cross -sectional study was performed in two stages: August, September and October 2009 The owners of qualitative step were 45 experts and factor analysis step were 321 faculty members, educational expert and human resources expert who affiliated to Guilan University of Medical Sciences. Data was collected by made questionnaire and Library Studies and Help study, the validity of its content were done as Expert panel and their credit structure using exploratory factor analysis (main component analysis) and confirmatory factor analysis (maximum likelihood), using alpha internal parallelism of Coranbach.

The first section of questionnaire contains 8 individual characteristics and demographic questions and the second part includes 42 questions about the variables affecting the productivity of human resources based on 5-degree Likert Scale. For adequacy of sample size Mayraklyn scale and for suitable data, Bartlett test was used respectively.

Results: The exploratory analysis identified 5 main components according the importance degree included of: 1. Organizational culture, with 18 variables and variance 26.29% 2. Environmental condition with 7 variables and variance 12.96% 3. Motivation factors with 10 variables and variance 12.84% 4. Empowerment with 4 variables and variance 7.47% 5. Leadership style with 3 variables and variance 5.05%.

Conclusion: The organizational culture, environmental conditions, Motivational factors, empowerment and leadership style, are effective factors orincreas ing manpower productivity. There was a significant relationship between organizational culture and man power productivity which is the most important factors.
