Introduction: Thyroid cancer is the most common cancer of endocrine system. Clinical, pathological and therapeutic factors affected patients' outcome with differentiated thyroid carcinoma.

Objective: To evaluation the effective clinicopathologic factors on patients outcome with well differentiated thyroid carcinoma.

Materials and Methods: In this retrospective analytic-descriptive study. Patients' files with thyroid carcinoma who referred to radiology and oncology ward in Omid and Ghaem hospital of Mashhad were assessed from 1996-2006. Cases with pathologic report of papillary and follicular carcinoma were considered and a specific questionnaire include age, sex, accepted time, pathologic subtype, tumor size and metastases, adjuvant treatment, last follow time, recurrence time, patient condition in the end refer and death time was recorded. Results: The patients' mean age was 50.14 and median age was 52 years. 66 patients (85.7%) had papillary and 11 cases (14.3%) had follicular carcinoma. End condition in 43 cases (55.8%) was good and in 34 cases (44.2%) was bad. Mean survival time was 44.1 and median survival time was 36 months. There was a meaningful correlation between T stage with end condition (P=0.037) but there was no meaningful correlation between N stage with end condition (P=0.665). Metastases in the first reference time had a clear correlation with patients' outcome. 41 patients (59.4%) from 69 cases with MO disease had a good end condition, against only one patient (16.7%) from 6 cases with Ml had a good outcome (P<O.OOl). Also there was a meaningful correlation between patients' outcome and clinical stage (P=0.075). None of the adjuvant treatment included iodine therapy (P=0.36), hormone therapy (P=0.378), chemotherapy and radiotherapy affected patients outcome.

Conclusion: According to this study, factors with influence on patient's outcome with differentiated thyroid carcinoma were tumor stage, metastases in the first reference and clinical tumor stage. Lymph node involvement and adjuvant treatment had no effect on patients' prognosis.

