Discipline and social control are concepts which are intermingled with each other; however they are related with all the other structures of the society. The type of discipline which determines the way of action and reaction among individuals in the society is known as social discipline which can differ from environment to environment. Social environments are divided into four categories: imposed or compulsory, random, selective and familial. Any of these environments requires its own certain social discipline. Individuals who belong to these local subcultures interact with each other in these environments constantly.

Objective: The research, in general, aims at determining factors related with social discipline in the fourfold environment of local subcultures.

Procedure: The above-mentioned research is among the descriptive-explanatory study series, wherein survey method has been used. Individuals have been the basis for analysis; and a questionnaire with some closed and perspective assessing questions was used for gathering the required data. The sample community in this research paper includes 240 respondents.

Model: a combined model having the regional and indigenous features has been utilized to examine the trend. It includes the following indices: external indices (demographic and economic) and indices (1-geographical indices, 2-social-cultural index, 3-disciplinary index and 4- regional stress or sensitivity of venue or space) which finally affects the dependent variable (social discipline in local subcultures) have been utilized in it (Hyman, 2001).

Results: The obtained r2 is equal 86.3 which indicates the explanation power of the dependent variable through using the model-dependent indices-and through manifold regression. It is through benefiting from route analysis that the direct impact of social-cultural index as the most important factor affecting the social discipline subcultures is 0.28% and the indirect impact of this index over the independent variable is 0,28%. The significance of 0.003 is an indication of the positive, direct, linear and significant relationship between independent internal variable (social-cultural index) and the dependent variable.
