One of the most important responsibilities of the police is providing information, offering consultation services, advertisement and encouragement and seeking cooperation in arenas and affairs related to it. The above-mentioned issues should be applied to both police personnel and the public and those outside the police organization. In order to materialize this objective in a continuous and proper way, it is absolutely essential to get information from the staff, addressees and the public; and offering information to the addressees. In other words, establishing relationship is considered to be a vital and critical issue. In case the relationship with the addressees is not established in a proper way, the public image and impression will be defaced; therefore police would not be able to establish proper relationship with addressees and interact with them.

Police can take benefit from internet services for improving communication-receiving and providing information- with its addressees; and a tremendous rise can be made toward materialization of community- oriented police. At the moment, police receives information and news via different means-telephone numbers 110, 197 and 116, P.O.BOX, e-mail, etc. -from its addressees and its staff. Police offers news and information to the public and its addressees via bulletins, publishing in the press, recording at its website, etc. to communicate with its addressees. There is a website www.police.ir wherein police can receive news and information through e-mail; the website can be visited by whoever wants to get information regarding different police related issues. However, it seems that through utilizing internet capabilities, addressees can be categorized; and news and information be provided on the basis of their business and interests. This article aims at offering an internet based commu-nication network (receiving and providing news and information) in the police organization. It is believed that due to being interactive, internet can perform the task in a different and more attractive way. The article, at first, offers the required structure and activities for internet-based information receiving and providing; then a communicative pattern for internet-based information receiving and providing is offered.
