Sport and leisure important factor in providing physical and mental health, often making the rich leisure, development of social relationships, and life away from the machine is back to nature. Exercise of universal like walking on, mountain march, morning exercise in the park by and neighborhoods and local and native game, including some activity with the minimum that people can pay it. This work, in addition to a direct effect on increasing the Spirit Happiness in society and social harm reduction and addiction is also effective role in promoting health and reducing diseases such as diabetes, cancer, osteoporosis and heart disease is vascular. Therefore, due to the importance of sport in society, sport and recreational facilities assessment and knowledge of the demands and needs people are needed to reach. Metropolis Isfahan million of the population, more than ever need is this study with a view discover and comments about the status of citizens in public exercise could be to strengthen and improve and resolve its action in cassette. Furniture, sports (Outdoor fitness equipment) is one of the facilities in Isfahan municipality to pay to facilitate the exercise and fun and comfort and welfare of citizens in the park and urban green space and install this study, the objective evaluation welcomed by citizens and satisfaction Style distribution and distribution equipment level is city of Isfahan. Statistical research community, including all park and green space municipality areas and samples used determined, samples determined cluster and randomly according to the size of society. In this study, samples Posts appropriate statistical population size and urban areas are randomly selected. Thus the number of 39 Park in City (3 parks in each region) were selected and Total downloads city, 390 questionnaires (30 per region) distribution and research necessary information was collected. Analysis tool, the use of SPSS and Excel software and the results, showed that the marital status of morning sports program age and the amount of space to park Motivation sport activities people have been effective and also variables Region Location, Park, marital status and the presence of morning sports program in Motivation of furniture sport have been effective.
