Objective: To review recent data on objectively measured overweight/obesity in
national representative samples of European adolescents (aged 10–18 years), as
well as availability of studies assessing trends in overweight/obesity in this target
group. Attention was paid to the ability of the data to describe the obesity epidemic,
especially in sociodemographic subgroups.
Design/setting/subjects: Data on prevalence and trends in overweight/obesity
among adolescents in the twenty-seven European Community member states,
Iceland, Norway and Switzerland, available as scientific publications as well as
reports or unpublished data by the end of 2009, were retrieved. Reports on the
most recent objectively measured data from national representative samples were
selected and described with regard to the years of data collection, sample sizes,
response rates, age ranges included, trends by age, type of measures of overweight/
obesity, sociodemographic variables and the sources of information.
Results: Objectively measured data on national representative samples were identified
for only half of the countries, and the trend studies were mainly conducted
applying subnational samples. Most studies used the criteria from the International
Obesity Task Force (IOTF) to define overweight/obesity, but the age ranges studied
and the years of data collection varied, and information on sample sizes and
response rates were often not presented. Data on trends of overweight/obesity
over time are increasing, and the most recent studies indicate that the prevalence
rate of overweight/obesity has stabilized. Few studies reported data by sociodemographic
subgroups other than gender and age.
Conclusions: Objectively measured data on national representative samples of
adolescents appear scattered, and there is a large heterogeneity with respect to the
quality and comparability of available data. Increasing use of the IOTF criteria for
overweight/obesity contributes to improved comparability across studies. Data by
sociodemographic subgroups, and in particular by socio-economic status, are scarce.
