Wireless communication is one of the most vibrant areas in the communication field today. In the last few years, the telecommunication industries development has focused on an intensive use of broadband systems, with high quality features. For this issue, new technologies with high transmission abilities have been designed. There is one fundamental aspects of wireless communication that make the problem challenging and interesting, that is the phenomenon of fading. Traditionally the design of wireless systems has been focused on increasing the reliability of the air interface where fading and interference are viewed as nuisances. Recent focus is now on spectral efficiency; associated with this shift is a new point of view that fading can be viewed as an opportunity to be exploited. In the initial stages, the single antenna system was used at transmitter and receiver in both the sides (SISO system) anticipating lower spectral efficiency and lesser capacity. It can be seen that root cause of the poor performance of these techniques is that reliable communication depends on the strength of the single signal path only which may be in a deep fade under certain circumstances. A natural solution is to ensure that the information symbols pass through multiple signal paths, each of which fades independently, making sure that reliable communication is possible as long as one of the paths is strong. This technique is called diversity. The main objective of this paper is to achieve the greater reduction in bit error rates for wireless system by implementing various antenna diversity principles along with efficient wireless channels. This paper starts with the introduction of different antenna diversity techniques. In second phase, the quality based algorithms are developed for simulation diversity principles. In the third phase, the simulation results are presented along with comparative analysis of different diversity principles, different modulation techniques and efficient w- - ireless channels. Paper Categories : Technical Solutions.
