We use detailed dynamic mechanical systems models to generate ground vibrations specific to a vehicle´s suspension and dimensions. These complex force distributions provide input to seismic propagation models running on massively parallel HPC computers, and result in vehicle-specific signatures. The model output is the ground response of the target traversing a complex 3D geologic region. In order to achieve scales that are useful to sensor system development, single calculation run times can exceed 70k CPU-h. Situational awareness is critical to achieving and maintaining battlefield superiority. Given the complex and dynamic environmental conditions of the battlefield, a spectrum of sensor assets are required to provide necessary information with appropriate levels of reliability. Unattended ground sensors (UGS) exploit seismic waves generated from moving targets and provide critical nonline of sight tracking and classification information. In order to develop robust ground sensor systems, systems must be developed that can adapt to the complex geologic environment. We use HPC computational resources to accurately model target specific ground motion in realistically complex geological environments. In turn, we use our simulation results to rapidly develop systems algorithms for keystone FCS subsystems including Intelligent Munition System (IMS), Tactical Unattended Ground Sensors (T-UGS), and Network Sensors for the Objective Force ATD (NSfOF). An excellent match of signals is achieved in both the time and frequency domain for our simulations of several vehicles. The data fidelity achieved replicates target specific signature features observed in field data. The level of detail in our synthetic results is sufficient to permit direct application of synthetic data to system algorithm development and engineering trade studies. Further, these data products may be used as a planning tool for optimal location of seismic UGS to maximize sensor performance (e.g., hill vs. Valley). Lastly, reliance on HPC simulations of this nature provides a low cost alternative to the traditional prototype development schemes that rely exclusively on expensive field tests.
