Background and Objective: Human Resources productivity is one of the important subjects among managers of organizations. To increase the productivity of human resources, universities as training centers play a significant role. Path analysis is one of the best practical and cost effective methods to assess various factors influencing productivity of human resources. This study aimed to investigate the importance of different factors which affect the productivity of human resources in Guilan University of Medical Sciences. 
Materials and Methods: This descriptive, analytical and periodical research was carried out in 2009. To determine various factors involved in human resources productivity, 45 experts and specialists in management and also to verify the importance of recognized factors 321 academic staff and educational experts from different faculties of the Guilan University of Medical Sciences were selected. Data were gathered through library and guidance research methods.  Content validity was assessed by referring to expert panel viewpoints using factor analysis (main headings) and construct validity was obtained by complementary factor analysis (maximizing reality). Reliability of analysis of the results was ensured using Lisrel 8/80 software. 
Results: Path analysis of the results regarding various factors which influence the productivity of human resources indicated that organizational culture with path standard of 0.51, motivational factors with path standard of 0.25, environmental conditions with path standard of 0.17, as well as empowerment of human resources and methods of leadership with path standard of 0.08, were outstanding factors which affect the productivity of human resources in Guilan University of Medical Sciences.
Conclusion: Organizational culture, motivation factors, environmental conditions, empowerment of human resources and leadership methods have impact on  the productivity of human resources in Guilan University of Medical Sciences and organizational culture is the most important item.

