Extended Abstract 
Introduction 
Today empowerment has been turned into one of the main concepts of sustainable 
development. Three types of relationship between empowerment and sustainable 
development are as follows: 1- Empowerment is a component of sustainable 
development 2- Empowerment is the cause of sustainable development3- 
Empowerment is the result of sustainable development. Therefore it is not possible 
achieve a sustainable development lacking empowerment of villagers.  Empower the 
villagers is affected by many factors, such as: background variables and Effects of 
plans and projects implemented in rural areas. This article studies the background 
variables of individuals as well as the effects of a steel factory on the empowerment 
of villagers. The study area is an industrialized rural district of Yalghuz Agaj in 
Qorveh county. Different definitions have been presented about the concept of 
empowerment. This is due to two factors: 1- Empowerment is a multidimensional 
   concept; and. 2- Empowerment is used in various fields such as management, 
psychology, geography, agriculture, sociology, etc. Empowerment as the ward 
shows is a process to empower people through which they can overcomes feelings 
of their helplessness and inabilities. There are many advantages to empower such as 
having access to the basic needs, satisfaction, self - esteem, sense of belonging and 
commitment, reducing the costs when increasing the profits, increasing 
participation, etc. Empowerment has many dimensions that they can be classified in 
the six dimensions of economic, political, mental, social, legal and cultural. The 
economic empowerment, as well as the social and mental one is more important than 
the others. Various factors are involved in the process of empowering the villagers 
that background variables of individuals act as an important factor. Different studies 
show the influence of background variables on empowerment through different 
factors such as employment, income, education, gender and age.  In addition to the 
mentioned variables, empowerment of individuals is influenced by development 
policies. The opinions are about the social and economic benefits of industry in rural 
areas can be stated as follows. From the viewpoint of economy, industrializing the 
rural areas includes many advantages such as, increasing farmers' incomes, 
employment opportunities and job security as well. Such a process could accelerate 
rural economic empowerment and thus cause non - agricultural job opportunities, 
reduce the income gap between rural and urban households and between the  rural 
households the meselves. Development of rural industry from the viewpoint of 
social and mental factors lead to increased subjective and objective welfare, 
increasing of trust and development of social relationships that causes positive 
results like increased social and mental empowerment of villagers. 
  
Methodology 
In this study, survey method has been used to the issue. The study population of case – 
study two rural districts Yalghuz Agaj and Qaslan in Qorveh county, Kurdistan 
province. These two rural districts are similar in many aspects and characteristics 
such as geographical location, the number of villages under the authority, 
population, language, religion, possibilities and services etc. The main difference is  
a steel factory which is located in Yalghuz Agaj that turned the district to an 
industrial one, with Qaslan lacks it. Using the Cochran formula 136 households were 
selected were selected from Yalghuz Agaj rural district and 121 households from the 
other, Qaslan. In each household an individual was selected in the range of 25 to 65 
years old, as a sample. 
 
Results 
Among the studied background variables in rural empowerment the relationships 
between the factors of age, education, income and job have been confirmed; but 
relationships with other background variables (sex, family size and number of 
employed people in household) have not been confirmed. Relationship between 
rural economic empowerment have been approved with five background variables 
including age, education, income, occupational status and the number of employed 
individuals in household. Relationship between social empowerment have loin 
confirmed with four background variables (age, education, and income and job 
status) and mental empowerment is related with three background variables (age, 
education and job status). The important finding is that the regional industrialization 
has not influenced any aspect of rural empowerment. 
 
Conclusion 
The steel factory in Yalghuz Agaj lacks the local labor and there fore the 
interactions between the workers and villagers are at the lowest possible level. In 
fact, the industry is as an isolated part of rural community,  so the factory has no 
impacts on it. The results show that the established industry in the region does not 
act an effective role on rural empowerment. In other words, the primary purposes of 
manufacturing industry have not been achieved in the rural district. Rural 
industrialization requires a careful study of characteristics of industry and village. 
Rural industrialization requires compatible industries with the needs and necessities 
of rural community, so the villagers could work there.
