Extended Abstract 
Introduction 
Drought is a slow-onset disaster that has economic, social, and environmental 
consequences. In Iran, drought is a re-current phenomenon. The current drought 
management strategies in Iran are based on crisis management. For example, when 
drought becomes visible in different parts of the country, a state  of emergency is 
declared and thus all resources are mobilized in that particular region. However, this 
type of drought management strategy is proved to be ineffective.  Therefore, risk 
management seems to be the most effective drought management strategies if 
drought-prone areas in Iran are to recover from the so called man-made disaster. 
Studies show that a prerequisite to drought risk management is vulnerability 
assessment of drought affected population. Once vulnerable groups are identified, 
drought policy-makers can then focus their attentions toward the most vulnerable 
areas. Therefore, the main objective of this study was to categorize the most 
vulnerable areas in rural areas of Kermanshah. Specifically,  this paper sought to 
investigate the socio-economic vulnerability among a sample of wheat farmers in 
Kermanshah, Sahne, Ravansar townships in Kermanshah province. The selection of 
these townships was based on a recent drought zone classification provided by 
provincial Meteorological Center in Kermanshah. Moreover, the selected townships 
were severely affected by drought during the years 2006-2008. In addition, three 
drought intensities were identified as "Very high drought intensity", "extremely high 
drought intensity", and "critical drought intensity". These intensities were based on 
mapping concentration from Meteorological Center in Kermanshah Province. 
 
Methodology 
Using multi-stage stratified sampling, 370 farmers across three townships were 
selected to participate in the study. A semi-structured questionnaire was designed to 
collect data. A researcher based instrument was designed to collect the data. In order 
to collect rich data, deep interview was conducted by the researcher. During the 
interview, retrospective questions were asked so that farmers could go back to the 
past and gradually see the present with the aim of visioning the future. In order to 
test for internal validity, a panel of experts from Department of Agricultural 
Extension and Rural Development reviewed the research instrument.  In addition, 
extension specialist from Agricultural-Jihad Organization provided further feedback 
to the questionnaire. Drought vulnerability assessment techniques were reviewed 
during extensive literature search. Among vulnerability assessment techniques, a 
formula suggested by Me-Bar and Valdez (2005) was considered appropriate for this 
study. 
 
Results and Discussion 
Results revealed that farmers in Ravanasar who experienced highest drought 
intensities were most vulnerable in socio-economic aspects while  farmers in 
Kermanshah Township with lowest drought intensity were least vulnerable in socio-
economic aspects. In addition, Sahne Township experienced drought with intensity 
somewhere between Ravansar and Kermansha Townships felt in the middle 
regarding socio-economic vulnerability. The interesting conclusion that can be made  
  is that there is a relationship between drought intensity and vulnerability level 
among study areas. The result of this survey study has implications for drought 
policy-makers as well as drought vulnerability research in Iran. First, identifying 
vulnerable regions help policy-makers to give priority to vulnerable groups when 
planning for drought mitigations. Furthermore, an up-to-date vulnerability 
assessment assists extension agents to plan more effective content for their 
educational program. In addition, risk management becomes a dominant strategy for 
managing drought impacts. Unlike crisis management, risk management alleviates 
the harmful effect of drought more effectively. The result of this study has also 
implications for drought vulnerability literature. Most drought studies have focused 
more on impact of drought with less attention being paid on vulnerability 
assessment. By using the formula proposed in this study, it is hoped that more 
drought researchers use this formula which in turn adds to external validity of the 
formula. 
 
Findings 
This study had its limitations too. For example, vulnerability is a social concept that 
varies in different areas contexts. A farmer who buys crop insurance to cover the 
losses due to drought may feel less vulnerable in one area than a farmer in another 
area with the same insurance coverage. For this reason, one needs to be more 
cautious when generalizing the findings of this study to a larger population. Another 
limitation worth mentioning is getting farmers to respond to retrospective 
questionnaires like the one used in this study. Farmers are reluctant in providing 
answers to the events that have occurred in the past. For this reason, it is suggested 
that interviewers spend more time with farmers and be patient when dealing with 
retrospective studies.  
