BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Intensive physical exercise influences physical and psychological stress that causes the hormonal and immune variations. The aim of this study was to assess the effect of resistance and endurance trainings on salivary immunoglobulin A (IgA), Cortisol, Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) concentration in untrained females.

METHODS: This research was quasi-experimental. Twenty nine untrained female students (aged; 24+2.2 yr, height; 161 ± 7.6 cm, weight; 58.6 ± 7.12 kg) were selected voluntarily and objectively and were divided into three groups randomly; control (C; n=9), endurance (E; n=10), resistance (S; n=10). E training consisted of running 65% MHR for 16 minutes during the first week, reaching 80% MHR for 30 minutes during the 8th week. S training consisted of having four leg-press, bench-press, pull down curls, and legs curls. During the first week, the training was done at 50% 1RM (one repetition maximum) in two sets with 10 repetitions. The intensity of training was increased to %80 1RM in 3 sets and 6 repetitions, during the 8th week. Before and after of 4 and 8 weeks of trainings 5ml unstimulated saliva were collected at 8 o'clock in the morning. IgA, DHEA and Cortisol variations were measured by salivary kits and ELISA.

FINDINGS: The results showed IgA concentration of S group had significant increase after 4 weeks of training which in the comparison between groups this difference was significant (f=17.97, p=0.000). DHEA concentration showed significant difference between S group compared with another groups which increased in S group (f^4.96, p=0.006). In comparison of stage 3 to stage 1 DHEA/cortisol ratio showed significant difference between S group compared with another groups (f=3.52, p=0.025). There was no alteration in Cortisol concentration of groups and significant correlation was not found between IgA and Cortisol.

CONCLUSION: Duration and intensity of trainings had no effect on immune system and risk of infection. Increase of body anabolic states probably results of resistance trainings.
