The security of quantum cryptography relies on the foundations of quantum mechanics, in contrast to traditional public key cryptography which relies on the computational difficulty of certain mathematical functions, and cannot provide any indication of eavesdropping or guarantee of key security. The proposal present in this work develops a quantum key distribution model to safeguard security in large networks, in the directions of classical cryptography and quantum cryptography. Two three-party Quantum key distribution are used in this model, one with implicit user authentication and the other with explicit mutual authentication, are proposed to demonstrate the merits of the new combination. The performance of Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) systems have notably progressed since the early experimental demonstrations. The current evolutions in QKD research indicate that the pace of this progression is very likely to be maintained, if not increased, in the future years. In parallel to these improvements of QKD techniques, commercial products are also being developed, making QKD deployment a feasible alternative for securing real data networks. Deployment of a real QKD network is however far from being straightforward. It requires development of a network architecture connecting multiple users that may possibly be very far away from each other. Considering the fact that the existing QKD links are only point-to-point, and intrinsically limited in distance, deployment of a practical QKD network structure is a nontrivial problem. The proposed work describes the proposed architecture for a QKD network specify the requirements relevant to the network design, protocols, and services. The objective of this specification is to define the major components and their main features The proposal provides security against such attacks as man-in-the-middle, eavesdropping and replay. It also improves the efficiency of the quantum key distribution which contains the fewest number of com- - munication rounds among existing Quantum key distributions. In this model two parties can share and use a long-term secret (repeatedly). To prove the security of the proposed schemes, this proposed model provides a primitive called the Unbiased-Chosen Basis (UCB) assumption with the quantum key in angular positions.
