


In international law, minority, in spite of the fact that there is not a unanimous and all-acceptable definition of its legal status, has distinguishable and discernable referents. Seemingly, discrimination against minorities means to deny them some rights and facilities which are accessible to the majority. Minorities might be denied these through direct or indirect ways, mostly in the form of cultural distinctions and non-participation in public affairs. This view is based on negative discrimination and favors people of politics. This is because granting concessions equal to those of the majority may endanger national integrity. On the other hand, international mechanisms for the supervision of minority rights are mostly advisory and almost none of them have been formed to deal with minority issues specifically. Moreover, until the mid 90s, indirect discrimination against minorities was not even recognized. Since then, significant changes have been occurred in this regard. The negative interpretation has been transformed into a positive one and new laws are being formed in support of this novel approach; that is, no longer non-discrimination against minorities means only to grant minorities equal rights with majority; it also means to give minorities special concessions, treatment and facilities which could possibly surpass those of the majority provided that this not to be permanent. These must continue as long as minorities become, in effect, promoted to the same level of political, economic, social and cultural status as the majority solidly. In addition, the abovementioned synergy must take place on the basis of objective and rational purposes and principles. At present, in some parts of the world, especially in Europe, this approach is being consolidated. This subject, specifically in recent challenging issues like the Internet sites and satellite channels, referred to as new media, is observable. 
Keywords: non-discrimination principle, minorities, indirect discrimination, supervisory mechanism, positive discrimination



 

 

