More than 4 million hectars of arable land of the country is devoted to saline and alkaline soils. Ion toxicity and reduction of availability of water and nutrient elements in crop plants decrease grain yield and yield component. Major parts of the arable saline lands are devoted to strategic crop plants such as wheat and barely. Reports indicate that application of chemical fertilizer for increasing grain yield is not economically beneficial to farmers. Therefore, new approaches are needed to increase grain yield in this type of soils. One of the approaches in increasing grain yield is to provide a symbiosis relationship between various species of Vesicular Arbuscular Mycorrhiza Fungi and different wheat cultivars. The objective of this study was to clarify the role of mycorrhizal symbiosis on increasing grain yield and yield component of wheat cultivars grown under saline stress in controlled condition. A Completely Randomized experimental design was set up in three level of salinity treatments (4, 8, 12 dS/m) from both NaCl and CaCl2 sources, 5 levels of inoculations with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal species [Glomus mosseae, G. intraradices, G. etunicatun, mixture of three mentioned species and a control (non inoculated)] on two salt tolerant and semi-tolerant wheat cultivars (promising line 9 [Bank "S"/Vvee "S"] and Chamran) in four replication under greenhouse condition at Karaj in 2006. Results showed that new salt tolerant wheat line 9 had higher grain yield compared with semi-tolerent Chamran wheat cultivar. Yield component such as kernel weight, kernel number per spike, kernel weight of spike and morphological characters such as spike length, dry weight of shoot and root were increased in Line 9 compared to chamran cultivar. Inoculation by mycorrhizal fungi species in both wheat cultivars, particulary under high levels of salinity stress, increased grain yield significantly (P < 0.05). Compared to control treatment with no inoculation the highest grain yield and yield component obtained from the fungal mixture inoculation treatment.
