The objective of this research was to develop a framework to design a transforming projectile system that has the ability to convert from a simple projectile into a guided projectile that can perform multiple tasks depending on its payload and guiding keyboard. This projectile would be launched from existing standard platforms. Our objective is to determine which design alternative potentially provides the greatest value relative to cost. The end result will be a tool kit that can be used to model transforming projectile alternatives. With this tool, we will be able to assess multiple alternatives and determine which best suites stakeholders´ needs, foremost being the soldier. The motivation behind this project stems from the need to accommodate and support soldiers in the quickly changing battlefield. The unconventional nature of the enemy and the battlefield makes weapon technology advancement crucial to adapting to the fight. We apply the Systems Decision Process (SDP) to develop the tool which is a decision analysis and support system. Using this we develop a functional hierarchy detailing the capabilities desired of our potential alternatives which can be used to create a value model based upon value scoring from our users. The value model will use the functions and capabilities of each projectile in order to determine each projectile´s value to potential users. This will become a framework to assess the relative goodness of the various feasible alternatives. Our results will be a model that clearly defines the value of all feasible alternatives, which can then be compared to cost in order to allow decision authorities to understand the trade space between the total value (and where the value is derived) of the feasible alternatives relative to their expected cost. We will also have the capability to conduct a sensitivity analysis using Monte Carlo simulations to determine how the scoring of our various value measures impacts the overall scoring and selection- - of alternatives.
