The objective of this research was to develop a device to transport an injured visitor down the spiral staircase to the pedestal where more conventional rescues apprautus can be used. Working with the National Parks Service (NPS), we looked to improve upon the current rescue system the Emergency Medical Service (EMS) Rangers use. The end result will be a lightweight stair chair designed to fit within the confined staircase. This device will decrease the amount of effort and energy required to transport the visitor down the staircase, and will also decrease the time it takes to get the person down to a level where proper aid can be administered. This project addresses the congressionally mandated changes that are required to have the Statue of Liberty open to the public. The atypical design of the statue´s staircase precludes any current conventional methods for emergency evacuation. While the current method used on site does work, a modified rope repelling system, Congress advocated a more permanent system must be developed for the statue to remain open. The Mechanical Engineering Design Process was used to analytically determine the scope of the project. Understanding the importance of user interface with the design for both the EMS Rangers and the patient, constant consulation with the National Park Service facilitated the successful outcome to the process. We designed a total of six prototypes and used weighted requirements into a decision making matrix to select the prototype with which to proceed with. The most important attributes to each design by weight were ease of use, weight, and comfort for the EMS teams. The result is a device that utilizes the outer railing of the staircase and rides down at a constant speed dampened by a modified personal escape rope system. The discontinuous nature of the railing required additional modification to the statue through the use of replacement railings at the five platforms during the ascent to the crown. The tight radi- - us causes complications in loading the person into the device.
