Design has an important role in human life. Concerning users' experience has a significant role in product design. Creating an emotional connection between user and product can make a product successful in market. Emotional design is related to users' emotions and effects of the products on the users. Today designers try to make balance in objective and subjective matters in product design and they also are more concern about the users' experience rather than to focus on the appearance of the product. The emotions appear unconsciously to the users and it is related to users' experiences, that's why discovering the emotions is not easy The aim of this study was to develop an organized method for obtaining form specifications of products according to the emotional needs of customers In this paper Kansei Engineering and Quality Function Development (QFD) was integrated to design an emotional LCD monitor. QFD is one of the techniques that can be applied for process and design improvement. Using this technique, the voice of customer is translated to the engineering and design characteristics. Kansei engineering was applied to extract product properties from unknown emotional needs of the users. As Kansei engineering is considered as an appropriate methodology for linking users' emotions and product properties. In this study Kansei Engineering was investigated. Then the role of words for describing users' emotions was considered. Finally Kansei Engineering and QFD were employed to design two monitors with emotional aspects. For this purpose, sample of LCD monitors was collected then four LCD monitors having more differences in the form fea-

ture were selected. A Kansei words were collected from experts, pertinent literature, customers and etc. A Kansei Word is a word describing the product domain. The number of Kansei words collected was reduced to 10 pair adjectives. 68 people aged 20 to 30 were selected randomly and were asked to evaluate each LCD monitor on each of 10 pairs Kansei word with a five-point Scale, and weigh the four LCD monitors. All data from questionnaire and interview were analyzed. The data showed that there are relationship between the users' feeling and design features and form of monitors. This study was done merely in visual product properties via two dimension pictures and, visual specifications of the products were studied. Due to the results of this study the design specifications regarding the form of the product were determined. New concepts were generated based on these specifications. Two new LCD monitors were designed based on the result of the study. The factors which were concerned in design, compared with the four samples that obtained the highest score in the study. Therefore, it was concluded that the emotional needs of the users were translated to form feature characteristics correctly.
