Gestalt psychological academy has influenced various fields of philosophy, science and art. Thus, the objective of this research is how gestalt visual perceptive principles affect educathonal books designing. This applied study has been based on analytical/ descriptive method in a theoretical manner. The study contents set on professional educations and experiences scope of the author. Psychological survey on gestalt academy has helped investigation and expenence of perceptive fields significantly, when it studies how human see and how realize visual comprehensions, In addition, it has created required background for generalized view approaches, considering artial aspect of perceptive experiences is more than other academies led to valuable results regarding visual perceptions and visual patterns meanings in addition to style of human body organs for viewing and visual organizing issue. Gestalt is a kind of floating discussion . some new subjects have been generated since 1960s thus far in gestalt scope having affected plastic arts and graphics. Hence, this article has been designed with the same directions. Gestalt visual perceptive principles include figure and ground relations, similarity, proximity, integration and continuity dominated by more general rule which has been named» pragnanz«. It means perfection trend or ultimate meaning of original existence of the experience, and whatever makes irrigularities to be at least and conversely makes constancy to be at most. Human comprehensions from figure, size, amount of color and resolution are constant in all the conditions, however sight stimulations are experiencing some alterations. In other words, sight experience is more depending on reality of physical objective constancy rather than different styles of intuitive stimulations reaching to the eyes . In scientific liter-

atures , these phenomena are called size constancy, figure constancy resolution constancy and color constancy. According to pragnanz law, all of gestalts are tending to an ultimate and accomplished one. Balancing, integration and vividness can make an opus capable to be realized more convenient. Performance of these principles are expressed in educational books layout part. Moreover, three principles of Lohr model used for educational books designing have been implied Lohr model based on visual perceptive theory, has been established on 3 principles including figure and ground hierarchy and gestalt . Further more, application of gestalt visual principles and style of visual elements organizing in 2 successive sheets of an educational book has been illustrated. On similarity and proximity ground, three classifications will be introduced that are useful in layout. Preparation. Even though all of gestalt visual perceptive principles are implementing for surveying and elucidating typography rules, continuity principle has specific role in this field. Williams proposed four principles for designing educational book Layouts in accordance with visual perceptive rules of gestalt: proximity and alignment principles help Later elements to have appropriate organization in pages and help readers to perceive relationships among the elements .Repetition principle is applied for making inegration and coincidence throughout the books and contrast principle accompanying with figure and ground principles of gestalt, conducts that required contrast for determining visual elements in a page can be reachable when black letters, sizes and font types, colors and spaces are selected. Also, reader can proceed through the passage and track his/her favorite information, rapidly.
