Objective: Studies have shown that certain personality types (distressed personality-Type D) and Psychological Distress (anxiety/depression) is associated with Myocardial Infarction (MI) and has etiological and prognostic implications. Substantial research evidence has also suggested that Type D personality is significant predictor of post MI anxiety, depression and impaired quality of life. The present study was conducted for the first time in Pakistan to assess type D personality and its association with the level of anxiety, depression and Quality of life in patients after Myocardial Infarction (MI). Methods: In the present cross- sectional study, 100(54 males, 46females) first time diagnosed (3 weeks - 12 weeks) patients of Myocardial Infarction (WHO criteria) were selected. Socio-demographic details and medical histories were recorded. Type D personality was assessed with translated version (Urdu) of Distress Scale (DS-14). Psychological Distress in terms of Anxiety and Depression was measured with Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) while Quality of Life was assessed with WHO quality of Life scale (WHOQOL-BREF). Results: The data analysis revealed that 59% of MI patients were identified as having Type D personality traits (27 Males, 32 Females). Significant symptoms of depression (43%) and anxiety (46%) were exhibited by these patients. Type D personality was identified as significant predictor of Quality of life [OR: 1.06; 95% CI (1.02 - 1.11), p&lt;.001], Depression [OR: 1.11; 95% CI (1.06 - 1.16), p&lt;.001] and Anxiety [OR: 1.09; 95% CI (1.04 - 1.14), p&lt;.001], after adjusting for demographic variables. Conclusion: It was concluded that significant levels of Type D personality characteristics, symptoms of anxiety and depression were exhibited by MI patients and Type D was independent predictor of depression, anxiety and impaired Quality of life in these patients. The present research highlighted the importance of Type D personality in researc- h on MI as a determinant of adverse health outcomes. It further emphasized the need for psychological assessment of these patients along with medical treatment to improve their quality of life and rehabilitation.
