Background: suicide is a serious public health problem in many provinces in Iran such as Kermanshah province. Objective(s): to determine the incidence of suicide &amp; its trend among kermanshah rural population and its risk factors. Methods: In this descriptive cross-sectional study, all cases of attempted suicide over a period of 7 years (2000-2006) have been investigated. There were a total number of 239 suicides, and we recorded data on age and job groups, sex, season of attempt, applied methods for suicide and its consequences. Results: The findings showed that the incidence rate of suicide was 22 per 100.000. 68.8 % of cases were females. The most job group of female was housewife (98.2 %) and in males were those whose jobs were related to agriculture and animal husbandry (31.4 %). In both genders, the age group 20-29 accounted for most cases (45.2 %). The seasonal patterns of suicide were different for males and females, in women the most suicides were occurred in spring (33.5 %) and for men in autumn (33.3 %). The study indicates that the preferred suicide method for women was self-burning (65.8 %) and for men were poisoning and hanging (29.3 % for each of them). The Suicide consequences were as followed: 89.1 % were died, 8.8 % were recovered and 1.3 % were disabled. 87.8 percent of women and 92 percent of men, whom were inspected, had completed suicide. Conclusion: Studying of this process in rural areas of Kermanshah had shown a downward trend from years 2000 to 2006. It means that the mental health plans- and interventions were carried out by PHC system could reduce high Suicide rate in Kermanshah rural areas. The high Percentage of suicide in rural areas indicated that it should be a warning for health policy and for decision makers to pay more attention to suicide prevention programs. It also requires intervention of other Sectors. It calls for an innovative, comprehensive, multi- sectoral approach including, both health and non-health sectors (e.g. e- ducation, police, justice, religion, law, politics, the media, etc). We found a higher percentage of completed suicide in rural women, different seasonal pattern and preferred suicide methods in both sexes in rural areas of Kermanshah in comparison with national- and international patterns.
