A compact airborne spectrographic imager (CASI) was used to obtain images over a field that had been set up to study the effects of various nitrogen application rates and weed control on corn (Zea mays). The objective was to determine to what extent the reflectances obtained in the 72 visible and near-infrared (NIR) wavebands (from 409 to 947 nm) might be related to differences associated with combinations of weed control (none, full, grasses only or broadleafs only) and nitrogen application rate (60, 120 or 250 kg/ha). Plots were arranged in split-plot experiment in completely randomized design at the McGill University Research Farm on Macdonald Campus, Ste Anne de Bellevue, Que., Canada. Weeding treatments were assigned to the main-plot units, and nitrogen rates to the sub-plot units. Three flights were made during the growing season. Data were analyzed for each flight and each band separately, then regrouped into series of neighboring bands yielding identical analyses with respect to the significance of the main effects and interactions on reflectance. The results indicate that the reflectance of corn is significantly influenced ((alpha)=0.05) at certain wavelengths by the presence of weeds, the nitrogen rates and their interaction. The influence of weeds was most easily observed in the data from the second flight (August 5, 2000), about 9 weeks after planting. The nitrogen effect was detectable in all the three flights. Differences in response due to nitrogen stress were most evident at 498 nm and in the band at 671 nm. In these bands, differences due to nitrogen levels were observed at all growth stages, and the presence of weeds had no interactive effect. Differences in other regions, whether related to nitrogen, weeds or the combination of the two, appeared to be dependent on the growth stage. Furthermore, results comparable to those of the hyperspectral sensor were obtained when a multispectral sensor was simulated, indicating little advantage of using the former.
