Oxidative stress is the imbalance between production of free radicals and
antioxidant defense system. Antioxidants, in little amounts, are substances which delay the oxidation
of oxidants. They neutralize free radicals in different ways and consequently prevent the affliction
and aggravation of different diseases such as Parkinson and cancer in which oxidants have an
important role. Anethum graveolens is a highly consumed plant in Iran
Objective: This study tries to makea comparison between the antioxidant effect of Anethum
graveolens and wheat germ oil as the richest source of vitamin E.
Methods: This research is designed in the experimental form and 24 male wistar rats those
were randomly divided into 3 groups. Anethum graveolens water extract was given to group A
orally with the dose 3 gr/kg B.W. Group B received 0.5 gr/kg wheat germ oil and the third
group (C) was considered as the control groupAfter two weeks about 5cc blood was taken
from the rats' hearts. The serum total antioxidant capacity was measured by FRAP method
with the use of TPTZ indicator and also the rate of serum thiol groups was measured by Hu
method with the use of DTNB indicator. In this method descriptive statistics (mean ± SD) and
ََ
Analyze Nonparametric Test (Kruskal-Wallis) were used.
Results: The mean and the standard deviation of the serum total antioxidant capacity were as
follows: in group A 0.23 ± 0.045 μmol/ml, in group B 0.161±0.149 μmol/ml and in the control
group 0.144 ±0.175μmol/ml. The data showed a significant difference between A, C groups
(P = 0.035) and the rates of the serum thiol groups were: in group A: 0.591±0.68μmol/ml, in
group B: 1.29±0.576 μmol/ml, and in group C: 0.264±0.179μ mol/ml; and between groups B and
C a significant difference was shown.
Conclusion: The results showed that Anethum graveolens water extract decreased the
oxidative stress more than wheat germ oil. Therefore antioxidant defense system has been
strengthened by consuming Anethum graveolens water extract which canbe used as a useful
supplement in a diet.

