Historical documents belonging to medicine and pharmacy consist of valuable
information about the herb and medicinal plants.
Objective: The main purpose of this study was to investigate the antibacterial and
phytochemical properties of 10 selected medicinal plants including of Echinophora platyloba
D.C., Eucalyptus globulus Labill, Euphorbia denticulata Lam., Hypericum perforatum L.,
Hypericum hyssopifolium Chaix, Hypericum scabrum L., Juniperus excelsa M.B., Peganum
harmala L., Plantago major L. and Scirpus lacustris L. in preventing the growth of pathogenic
Nocardia in-vitro. All species of Nocardia are found in nature in the soil and aquatic
environments. The bacteria are aerobic, gram-positive, partially acid fast bacilli. Nocardia
asteroides a highly pathogenic microorganism infects humans through the respiratory tract.
The bacterium is primarily an opportunistic pathogen that causes the infection in patients
with immunodeficiency. Nocardia brasiliensis is most commonly responsible for cutaneous
infections.
Methods: The antibacterial ability and phytochemical properties of methanolic extract of
the above herbs against species of pathogenic Nocardia were investigated by means of
appropriate agar distribution methods. After incubating of the cultured media, the diameter
of the clean zone formed in each concentration was measured and correlated to the ability of
the extracts to inhibit the growth of Nocardia strains.
Results: According to the results, the various concentrations of the 5 medicinal plants out of
the 10 herbs e,g, Hypericum perforatum L., Hypericum, hyssopifolium Chaix, Hypericum
scabrum L., Juniperus excelsa M.B., Scirpus lacustris L. have significant antibacterial activity
against Nocardia asteroides and N. brasiliensis.
Conclusion: Interestingly the results show inhibitory effects of the medicinal plants on
different strains of the Nocardia in-vitro. It was found that the 5 medicinal plants out of the 10
herbs have potent antibacterial property. We came to this conclusion formed by 10%
concentration of the above herbal extracts in appropriate distribution routs, were similar to
that of the clear zones formed by specific antibiotic against Nocardia species, e.g. Amikacin,
Amoxicillin, Ceftazidime, Ceftizoxime/Cefotaxime, Cephalothin, Cotrimoxazol. The
antibacterial activity of the above herbs is probably associated to the potency of strong
antibacterial properties of flavonoids, saponins and tanans presents in the methanolic
extraction of the above medicinal plants.
