Air transportation has an important position among the other modes of transportation due to its
significant impact in the economy and welfare of a society. Within the several components of
air transportation market, flight network plays a fundamental role and considerably affects the
airlines revenue. Improvement of the network system requires an accurate plan and
programming. Hub-and-spokes are of further interest; as such networks reduce the operational
costs, create proper ground for flight network development and extension, and help in
competition. However, several models have been introduced for hub-and-spokes design
purposes based on the diversity of the effective factors, decision-making variables and different
forms of the network.
Generally speaking, hub-and-spokes are categorized into two principal sectors: single allocation
and dual or multiple allocations. Within a single allocation, traffic is accumulated in a single
hub and then distributed to the destinations, while within a dual-allocation network, the
gathered traffic at the first hub is again distributed to another hub before directing it to the final
destination. This research presents a linear model for hub-and-spokes evaluation and planning,
determining optimum flight routes and fleet assignment. The model considers both direct flights
and hub connections, and outputs an optimum network based on the mixture of these two
options. Sets of airport connections are so designed to well cover all the necessary inter-airport
trips. This particular is done by utilizing hub-and-spoke system as the airport networks. To
fulfill the requirements of the study location (Iran), in this paper, single allocation was selected
to develop the models, meaning that just one hub has been considered in the modeling process.
Inter-airport demands of the passengers were inputted in the network and the model works only
for passenger transportation. The objective was to design the hubs so as to obtain an optimum
network. In other words, the model is to suggest the best option with which the demand is
handled cost-effectively. Trips are planned to be either direct or meeting a one-hub maximum.
As the model is to minimize the cost, such variables as demand for variety of routes and type
and quantity of the available aircrafts were included. The model was developed in two stages to
ease the process. The first stage dealt with the target function and the fleet was assigned to the
outputs of the stage one. Iran's internal flight network was chosen as the case of study to
develop the model based on the country's geographical situation and available data. 59 airports
were chosen as the total set of airports and trip origins. The number of hub candidates and
destination airports were eight including Isfahan, Ahwaz, Bandar Abbas, Tabriz, Tehran,
Shiraz, Kerman and Mashhad airports. Based on the availability, the data of five types of
aircrafts were used in the model development. Lingo Version 8 has run the model using branchand-
bound method to obtain accurate and reliable outputs. Up to eight hub networks were
considered by the model and the model confirmed that with increase in the number of hubs,
operational cost decreased. However, cost reduction had lower rate for the systems with six
hubs and over. The results also suggested that the probability of stop in a hub rises for longer
trips. Flights longer than 1.5 hours had to stop at one hub in three-, four-, five-, six- and eighthub
networks.Four-hub network was found to be the optimum one due to having the shortest stop slot where
fixed cost has been allocated for selecting an airport as the hub. The hubs of the optimum fourhub
network are Tehran, Shiraz, Kerman and Isfahan airports. The results showed that demand
is not the only effective factor in the selection of the hub; it means that another key factor,
geographical positions, has effect and the airport with higher demand is not necessarily selected
as the hub. Therefore, hub-and-spokes can enhance the efficiency of the airports with lower
demands. As an example out of the results, passengers intended to use Isfahan and Kerman
airport as their hubs in a four-hub network were more than the ones targeting Isfahan and
Kerman airports as destinations. Analysis of the four-hub network cleared that, according to the
current demand and operational costs of different aircrafts, large planes (e.g. Airbus 300) and
small lpanes (e.g. Foker 50) will perform more flights in comparison the with other types. Using
the model developed in this research, airlines will be able to forecast and plan their required
fleet combination based on the demands.
