Introduction: Recurrent Aphthous Stomatitis (RAS) is one of the most common oral ulcerative diseases This lesion affects 20%of general population. Clinical features of these lesions are as minor, major and herpetiform ulcers. Etiology is unknown. It seems that RAS to be multifactorial. Objective: Evaluarte theassociated factors with recurrent aphthous stomatitis.

Materials and Methods: In this descriptive -analytical and cross sectional study, 1105 persons attending to health-therapeutic centers in Zahedan were selected in a multi-stage random manner; they were assessed for associated factors to development of RAS. Data gathered as single stage and by interview, filling questionnaire and clinical exam. Diagnosis was performed at base of clinical feature, in this type, in minor aphthea, the ulcers are less than 1cm in diameter, round, clearly defined and erythematic ulcers. In major RAS, painful lesions are more than 1cm in diameter which may last for several weeks, and usually heal with scar formation. The herpetiform aphthous stomatitis, the least common type, presents itself as multiple clusters of pinpoint lesions that nay give rise to large irregular ulcers lasting 7 to 10 days.

Finaly all of data were extracted from the questionnaire and statistically analyzed by SPSS and chi-square manner.

Results: Among 1105 examined person (476males and 629 females), 199 persons(18%)were affected to aphthea that among them, 168 cases(84.4%) minor aphthea,26 cases(13.1%) major and 5 cases(2.5%)had herpetiform. There were significant statistically correlation between the abundance of RAS and age (P<O.OOl), education (P<O.OOl), job (P0.002), history of aphtea (P<0.001), family history (P<O.OOl) and brushing (P<0.001). There were significant statiscally correlation between the abundance of RAS and sex, using snuff, using tobacco and using mouthwash.

Conclusion: RAS is multifactorial lesion and factors such as age, high stress job groups, high education were assoc ated with occurrence of the aphthea in this study. Tobacco had no correlation with occurrence of RAS.
