This research attempts to formulate an analytical model for the studying and assessment of necessary factors that have strong effects on the level of Iranian Technology Park competitiveness. The result of this model leads to increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of Technology Parks planning stage. Methodology/Approach: The main framework of this research is based on studying the projects and research, which in their methods use the Porter´s diamond model or SWOT analytical method. On the other hand, this framework is customized for the future needs of Technology Parks and clarifies the kind of information that must be gathered. Finding: Identification of the core competencies and competitive advantages of the Iranian Technology Parks is the most important objective of this research. So by using this information we can design more competitive plans for the sustainable development of technology parks. Values/Innovative Aspects: One of the innovative and new aspects of this research is formulating and combining an analytical model for assessing the technology parks capabilities and competitiveness. Also, most of the existing knowledge and articles about technology parks are just limited to macro conditions and do not pay attention to detailed competitiveness issues and their total needs. So, the proposed model tried to produce detailed information about key success factors for technology parks. Limitation: Using the interview method for gathering the information as the only method is one of the limitations of this research. In order for this research to be a high quality one, various information gathering method, must be used. Also, lack of detailed information andknowledge about technology parks, SWOT analytical method and Porter´s diamond model are the greatest challenges of this research. Any way, it is preferred to apply proposition model in other technology parks to enhance the validity of the model. Applied Proposition: Applying the proposed model leads t- - o identifying pre-conditions and factors to achieve Technology Park success and help us to gain obvious sight for preparing the right plans. In fact, we can use this information to design promotion programs for primary needs in order to facilitate technological and industrial development in a Park region.
