The theoretical basis of a cybernetic metabolic network design and analysis framework, which has been subsequently successfully applied to predict system response to genetic alteration, is presented. This conceptual methodology consists of three main branches, namely, a model realization framework, a representation of genetic alteration, and lastly, a metabolic design component. These concepts are introduced as a series of postulates that describe the basic tenets of the approach. Each branch is discussed in turn, starting with the cybernetic representation of arbitrarily complex metabolic networks. A set of postulates is put forth that affords the modular construction of cybernetic models of metabolic networks using as a base a library of elementary pathways. This is followed by a discussion of the representation of genetic alterations within the cybernetic framework. It is postulated that the objective of the base network and the altered system are identical (at least on the time scale required for the organism to "learn" new objectives). This implies, with respect to resource allocation, that the base network and its genetically altered counterpart may still be treated as optimal systems; however, the set of competing physiological choices open to the altered network expands or contracts depending upon the nature of the genetic perturbation. Lastly, to add a predictive design aspect to the methodology, we present a set of postulates that outline the application of metabolic control analysis to cybernetic model systems. We postulate that sensitivity coefficients computed from a cybernetic model, although still local in scope, have the added benefit of a systematic representation of regulatory function as described by the cybernetic variables. Thus, information gained from sensitivity measurements stemming from a cybernetic model include the explicit input of metabolic regulation, a component that is lacking in a purely kinetic representation of metabolic function. The sensitivity results can then be employed to develop qualitative strategies for the rational alteration of metabolic function, which can be evaluated by simulation of an appropriately modified cybernetic model of the base network.
