Objective: The aim of this study was to evaluate the prevalence of psychiatric disorders in patients with dermatologic disease and its relationship to the patients' quality of life. Method: This study was cross-sectional. A total of 414 patients with various dermatologic diseases participated in this study. The participants were recruited from an outpatient clinic and inpatient ward of a referral dermatologic hospital using a simple random sampling method. Demographic variables, duration and characteristics of disease and admission status were recorded. Patients were asked to complete two questionnaires: GHQ-28 (General Health Questionnaire) ,and DLQI (Dermatologic Life Quality Index). Results: The estimated prevalence of psychiatric comorbidity in dermatologic patients was %51.3.There was a significant relationship between GHQ score and educational level, marriage statues, type and course of dermatologic disease and admission status (p<0.05). The probability of psychiatric disorders increased among patients with lower educational level, married subjects, patients with relapse of the disease and those having some special skin diseases such as Psoriasis and Pemphigus. However, no significant relationship was observed between the GHQ score and duration of disease and sex. Moreover, there was a significant relationship between quality of life and educational level, marriage status, type of dermatologic disease, course of disease and admission status (p<0.05). Higher quality of life was observed among participants with higher educational level, those who were unmarried, patients with first episode and milder diseases. This study shows a significant relationship between quality of life and mental health (p<0.05). The lower probability of concomitant mental disorder, the higher the quality of life. Conclusion: Psychiatric disorders are frequent among patients with dermatologic diseases. These disorders have a negative effect on quality of life. Psychiatric consultation, liaison services and education in dermatologic wards can help the diagnosis, treatment and follow up of psychiatric comorbidity in dermatologic patients.
