Background: Hirsutism is a common clinical condition with different etiologies. Many of these patients have frank or subclinical abnormalities in the adrenal and ovarian steroidogenesis. The disease may be associated with other clinical signs of hyperandrogenism. The objective of this study was to investigate the clinical features of hirsutism and its etiologic factors in premenopausal Iranian women. Methods: In a cross-sectional study, 790 consecutive premenopausal women referred to the dermatology Clinics of Hazrat-e Rasool and Firoozgar University Hospitals and three private dermatology clinics during 2001 – 2003 with the clinical diagnosis of hirsutism were studied. All patients underwent detailed clinical assessment and transabdominal ultrasonography of the ovaries. Endocrinologic work-up was performed for 285 patients. Results: Hirsutism was mild in 65%, moderate in 32.5%, and severe in 2.5% of the patients. Positive family history was found in 56.2%. Hormonal studies revealed some abnormalities in 35.2% of the patients. Coexisting medical conditions included acne in 70% of the patients, menstrual irregularity in 38.6%, androgenic alopecia in 21.3%, obesity in 6.5%, acanthosis nigricans in 4.9%, and diabetes in 0.6% of the patients. Etiology of hirsutism was identified as polycystic ovary syndrome (62.53%), idiopathic (35.19%), congenital adrenal hyperplasia (0.38%), prolactinoma (0.13%), and undetermined (1.77%). Polycystic ovary syndrome was diagnosed more frequently in women with menstrual irregularity than eumenorrheic patients (97.70% vs. 40.41%, P < 0.001). Conclusion: Hirsute patients frequently have either elevated androgen levels or clinical conditions associated with hyperandrogenemia. Eumenorrhea does not rule out endocrine abnormality and particularly polycystic ovary syndrome which is a common cause of hirsutism. We recommend performing endocrinologic work up, investigation of coexisting hyperandrogenic states, and evaluation of polycystic ovary syndrome in all patients with hirsutism.
