This research paper was carried out by means of a descriptive-measuring method to review the role of university in creating social capital in order to present a model for improving high education system. Statistical population in this study were all 620 full-time faculty members of Kerman province Azad Universities in academic year 2008-09 (N=620). A number of 175 were selected using relative random sampling. Two researcher-designed questionnaires were used to collect data. 54 variables and sub-components were extracted based on the literature reviewed; The first questionnaire was compiled to determine the status quo of social capital. Content validity of the questionnaire was confirmed by experts in the field, and its reliability was calculated using Cronbach Alpha (98%). By use of factor analysis, 7 main components (namely organizational identity, capability making, cooperation and public benefit, knowledge sharing and creating intellectual capital, trust and solidarity, cooperative management and awareness) and 54 sub-components were recognized. Results revealed that trust and solidarity, had the highest mean and cooperative management had the lowest mean as the main components. Subcomponents such as commitment and belonging, leadership power and management, benevolence, generosity, creating relationship between knowledge-holders and knowledge-seekers, accessibility to the need-groups had the highest mean, while sub-components as glorification and appreciation, justice, tendency toward collective objective, fostering innovation and creativity, solidarity in the entire organization and cooperative management had the lowest mean, reflecting undesirable conditions in these areas. Results also showed that there was no significant difference between respondents' opinions concerning variables of sex, education and working record. There were some differences, however, regarding variables of scientific rank and university location; regarding scientific rank, the highest social capital was related to (professors) and the lowest to teachers. Also, concerning place of employment, Zarand Town and Kerman City had the highest and lowest social capital respectively. According to findings of the first questionnaire, the second one was compiled with 5 parts (philosophy and objectives, theoretical fundamentals, perceptual framework, executive steps and evaluation system). Then, it was valued (96%) using Mathematical expectation.
