Background: The geriatric population is the most rapidly growing segment of the society regarding the evolution and improvement of health programs.
Objective: To assess the oral health associated with oral health behavior in independent elderly outpatients referred to public dental health centers in Talesh (Guilan, Iran).
Methods: A cross –sectional study with total of 203 elderly patients (+65 years old) were investigated by means of interview and oral examination. Based on a simple cluster sampling, the demographic information, oral behavior, dental status, and systemic conditions were noted. Clinical examinations were conducted by a specialist in oral medicine on the basis of WHO criteria in urban and rural dental centers of Talesh. Statistical tests including the chi-square test, t-test, and the logistic regression were employed to analyze the data using the SPSS version 17. 
Findings: The mean age was 72±6.44 years with an age range from 65 to 79 years old. Of total patients, 125 (61.5%) were males and 78 (38.4%0) females with 102 cases from urban and 101 from rural areas. Furthermore, 160 patients (more than two third of cases) were completely without teeth among those 95% with dentures and 10 without denture. The mean numbers of remaining teeth in partially dentate people were 7.34 ±4 and 95% found to have root caries vs. 18.5% with coronal caries. Oral hygiene practices such as times of tooth brushing, inter-dental cleaning, and toothpaste use were significantly higher in urban than the rural residents. Sixty seven percent had at least one general health problem and hypertension was more prominent among both the female and rural people (p < 0.001). Moreover, diabetes mellitus was dramatically more prevalent among females (p < 0.004) than males.
Conclusion: On account of this study, more than two third of the population were edentulous. Under such circumstances, routine oral examination as part of health program with or without welfare services in elderly people is recommended.

