
Introduction: Inappropriate performance of delivery care team is one of the most important causes of maternal mortality. Lack of objective tools, reduces the opportunity for a systematic valid evaluation in clinical examinations. Therefore, this study investigated the reliability and validity of assessment tools in comprehensive final examination of midwifery students at the end of their education (at the time of graduation).
Methods: In this correlational study, founded on existing evaluation tools for final comprehensive exam in Mashhad School of Nursing and Midwifery, students’ skills in 4 areas of examination (delivery room, gynecological unit, pregnancy care, and maternal and child’s health) were assessed (July 2010). Thirty one students (22 students of 8th and 9 students of 6th semester of midwifery BSc program) were evaluated within 5 consecutive days by 2 examiners. Content validity was determined by field experts. Mean scores achieved in each area of examination were compared in order to appraise construct validity as well as total mean score of students of senior and junior semesters (8 and 6). Alpha Cronbach coefficient was used for reliability analysis. 
Results: A significant difference of 26 percent between total mean score of students studying at 8th semester with that of students studying at 6th semester in comprehensive final examination, proved the construct validity in evaluation forms of midwifery students based on Royal College of Gynecology and Midwifery Definition in this examination (p=0.01). There was an average to high Cronbach’s Alpha coefficient (0.83 - 0.51) in each area of examination which reveals an internal consistency within the evaluation tools. Content validity was also high (0.8). The lowest and highest reliability of evaluators determined to be 0.82% and 73.5% respectively, according to definitions characterized by Cincinnati University.
Conclusion: The tools used for evaluating midwifery students at the final examination in Mashhad School of Nursing and Midwifery met reliability and construct validity criteria and are recommended to be used for evaluationg midwifery students for graduation.

