Today pain control in patients before and after general anesthesia (GA) and reducing the side effects of narcotics are important issues in the studies on anesthesia. The use of efficient premeditation before GA is one of the recommended methods. Dexam¬ethasone is one of these agents that may be applied as an appropriate premeditation to decrease the dose and side effects of narcotics. The objective of this study is to evalu¬ate the pre-medication effects of dexamethasone in pain control after general anesthe¬sia in patients operated in Aria and Bahman 22nd hospitals.This study was planned as a randomized, double blind, clinical trial on 80 patients aged 17 to 45 years old who were candidates of minor surgery under general anesthe- sia.These patients, after being justified and signing the informed consent forms, were classified into two groups (D and S), according to the table of random numbers. 2cc of normal saline as a placebo was injected into the subjects in group S and those in group D received injections of 2cc of Dexamethasone (8 mg) as pre-medication before the surgery.Then, all the patients underwent GA with a standard protocol and finally the operation was done.
After the operation, the researchers visited the patients and asked them to sign the designed forms if they felt any pain in 3, 6 or 12 hrs after the GA. The data were then analyzed using Pearson Chi- Square and Fisher Exact Test.
In this study the data were collected from 80 patients (49 females & 31 males) with a mean age of 30.7± 4.46 years (17 to 45). The differences were not significant. Both groups were similar in drug history and the use of analgesics, narcotics, cigarettes and alcohol as well as having a history of pain in the previous operations. The mean rate of pain in 3,6,12 hours after operation was significantly lower in group D than in group S with a significant difference of P = 0.05.The study proved that Dexamethasone is significantly effective in controlling the post-surgical pain. So, it can be concluded that the injection of dexamethasone before surgery as a pre-medication can affectively mitigate the post- surgical pain and can decrease the dose of narcotics and their side effects.
