Pes anserinus is the attachment of the sartorius, gracillis and semitendinosus tendons to the proximal anteromedial aspect of tibia. Clinicians commonly refer to the pain in this area as pes anserinus bursitis. The signs and symptoms include: localized pain, tenderness and swell¬ing. The common risk factors are obesity, osteoarthritis and abnormal walking. The treat¬ment of pes anserinus bursitis includes injecting a long acting corticosteroid into this area or conservative treatments like the use of NSAIDS, friction massage and physiotherapeutic methods.The objective was to compare the results of the treatment of pes anserinus bursitis with local injection of triamcinolone acetonide and those of the conservative treatments.Fifty eight patients suffering from pes anserinus bursitis who were visited in the orthopedic clinic of Aria hospital, Baliman 22nd hospital and private offices participated in this study. The patients were divided into two groups: One group was treated by local injection of triam¬cinolone acetonide and the other group underwent conservative treatments. The results of the treatment were assessed after 3 weeks, using VAS and WOMAC scales.According to the findings measured by VAS scale, there was a significant difference between the average intensity of the left knee pain before and after the treatment (p=0.0113), but there was no such difference in two treatment groups (p=0.338). Based on WOMAC measure¬ments, there was a significant difference in the intensity of the left knee pain before and after the treatment (p=0.0108) while such difference was not found in the two treatment groups. (p=0.151)As for the right knee, according to the results obtained from VAS scale there was a signifi¬cant difference in the average of intensity of the right knee pain before and after the treatment (p=0.0l95). However, the results showed no difference in the intensity of pain between the two treatment groups (p=0.968). WOMAC scale, too, revealed that there was a significant difference in the intensity of the right knee pain before and after the treatment. (p=0.3002) Again, there was no such difference between the two treatment groups. (p=0.825).Treatments of Pes Anserinus bursitis with both local injection of triamcinolone acetonide and conservative therapy are equally effective.
