Allergic Rhinosinusitis is one of the most common problems that make people refer to rhinolaryngology clinics, spending a lot of money for the treatment. The antigens from the growth of fungi in sinus cavity causes allergic manifestation and resistance to the treatment. The objective of this study was to evaluate any relationship between chronic rhinosinusitis and the allergic symptoms concerning certain fungi.This is a sectional case - control study on 60 patients who referred to the rhinolaryngology clinics of Bahman 22nd and Imam Reza hospitals. 30 patients with chronic rhinosinositis and allergic symptoms like rhinorea, sneezing, nasal itching were selected for the study as the case group and the other 30 patients with chronic rhinosinousitis without the allergic symptoms as the control group After CT scan evaluation, all the patients were sent to the Endoscopic Department Of Imam Reza Hospital. The endoscopic samples obtained under general or local anesthesia were prepared from maxillary sinuses and were sent for culturing (Saboro Agar) and pathologic evaluations.Positive fungal culture was found in 26.7% of the subjects with both chronic sinusitis and allergy. The frequency rate of such finding was significantly more than that of the control group (4.7%). The most frequent fungus was found to be aspergilus. There was a significant correlation between the fungi and the allergic symptoms in certain seasons (e.g. 44% posi¬tive culture in summer). The frequency of asthma in the subjects with positive culture for aspergilus was 60% that was significantly more than the control group. The number of the subjects that showed palor of Mucosa during the endoscopy (25%) revealed fungal involve¬ment which was significantly more than the control group (4.17%).Based on the findings of this study, fungi are one of the causes of chronic allergic rhinosinus¬itis. Therefore, an evaluation of fiingal infection in all of the patients with chronic rhinosinus¬itis and allergic symptoms is recommended.
