Innovative Software Technology has been effectively used to assist the Community Health Upliftment (CHU) program in Thane district, India. The main objective of the CHU is to drastically reduce the incidence of future disabilities and the correction of existing disabilities. This is in line with the International Initiative against Avoidable Disablement promoted by UNDP, WHO and UNICEF. The field work is carried out by Impact India Foundation in association with the Govt. of Maharashtra, India. The rationale is to reach 1.5 million populations -- predominantly tribal and replicate this model across the nation. There are two main focus areas namely Curative and Preventive. Curative care refers to treatment and therapy provided to a patient with intent to improve symptoms and cure the patient´s medical problem. Some of the Curative categories entail - Neonatal &amp; Maternal illness, Visual Impairment (including Glaucoma), Hearing Deficiency, Cleft Lips &amp; Palates, Dermatology, and Oral Health Hygiene &amp; Dental Care. Preventive treatment helps pre-empt and decrease chances of acquiring a disease by using awareness as a medium and taking precautionary measures. Some of the Preventive categories entail - Anemia in women of child bearing in age, emphasis on safe deliveries and neonatal care, Under 5 years of age Malnutrition, Vitamin A Deficiency in mothers and children, Iodine Deficiency Disorder, Early identification of disabilities, Vaccine Preventable Diseases, Information Education and Communication. A Web based comprehensive system encompassing MIS was developed to assist social workers align priorities of initiatives and track the progress made in each area. This resulted in bringing about visibility and accountability with trace ability for the initiative with trend analysis. The main beneficiaries of the program are marginal tribal people in general and particularly children and women suffering from acute curable and preventable diseases. The whole co- munity benefited by bringing awareness and cultivating safe &amp; hygienic habits.
