We research cornerstone aspects in the design, modeling, analysis, and optimization of pointing systems. Specifically, the major objectives are encompassed on development of high-performance high-precision pointing systems with surface-mounted piezoelectric (PZT) actuators and MEMS. Pointing systems are flexible, and it is inherently difficult to stabilize and control the flexible modes and guarantee accurate pointing. Therefore, advanced actuation and sensing hardware and design paradigms must be developed and implemented. This paper focuses on the application of the PZT actuators, MEMS and high torque density brushless servomotors to attain the desired objectives. These novel actuators and sensors integrated with high-performance electronics. Performance assessment is performed through high-fidelity modeling, heterogeneous simulations, data-intensive analysis, experiments and characterizations. Robust control algorithms are designed and implemented with the ultimate objective to improve the performance, e.g., efficiency, accuracy, stability, settling time, fast retargeting, etc. Far-reaching multidisciplinary research and multi-objective optimization of interactions between beam-mechanical structures-actuators-sensors-electronics/ICs are performed. It is illustrated that advanced actuators, sensors, ICs and DSPs must be used to achieve the objectives. In particular, PZT actuators and brushless servomotors guarantee high-accuracy fast positioning, rapid retargeting and vibration attenuation. Devising of pointing system (mechanical and electronic design includes actuation and sensing hardware developments, discovery and implementation of novel actuators and sensors, optimization their location and number, integration of actuators-sensors-ICs-DSPs), analysis, modeling, design and optimization are fundamental problems. These problems are addressed and solved. This paper documents the innovative results in modeling, analysis, and control of high-performance pointing systems.
