Individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD) are in need of effective physical fitness training programs, leisure time opportunities and strategies to improve their participation. The overall objective was to gather ldquolessons learnedrdquo towards the formulation of a best practices model for the application of VR intervention for adults with IDD. During study 1 a group of 33 participants (mean age = 28.1 plusmn 5.3 years; moderate IDD level) underwent a 12 week program of 2-3 30 minute sessions per week consisting of game-like exercises provided by the GestureTek´s IREX VR operated by an occupational therapist. During study 2 a research group (N=30; mean age = 52.3 plusmn 5.8 years; moderate IDD level) participated in a 6 week fitness program of three 30 minute sessions per week consisting of game-like exercises provided by the Sony PlayStation II EyeToy VR system. Changes in physical fitness were monitored by the Energy Expenditure Index (EEI), the modified 12 min walkrun and the Total Heart Beat Index (THBI). Results were compared to a control group (N=30, mean age = 54.3 plusmn 5.4 years). During study 3, 24 participants with severe levels of IDD (N=30; mean age = 52.3 plusmn 5.8 years; moderate IDD level) were matched for age, IDD level and functional abilities with a control group (N=30, mean age = 54.3 plusmn 5.4 years). The research group participated in an 8 week VR program (3 times per week) using GestureTek´s IREX video capture technology operated by the local caregiver staff. The VR programs were found to attract full participation by the participants at moderate levels of IDD but some difficulties were found in fully engaging all individuals at severe levels of IDD. Different commercial VR systems were used and were found to be usable by health-profession students and local caregiver staff. Significant (P&lt;0.05) improvements in physical fitness were demonstrated for the research group in comparison to the control group. VR - technology is an effective tool to engage individuals with IDD in a variety of activities by operators of different educational background and professions. VR technology could be successfully operated for adults at mild, moderate and severe levels of IDD and VR technology resulted in significant improvements in the physical fitness levels of the participants. Further research is needed to complete the construction of a ldquobest practicerdquo model.
