Statement of Problem: Most of the scientists believe that psychological and behavioral problems of the Youth are roots of the aggression. These behaviors can cause to problems between individual, crimes, offense to others rights and internalization can lead to physical and psychological problem. The importance of coping strategies about Condition to showing youngsters behavior it has been clear by scientists.

Objective: The Examination of Relation to Between Coping Strategies and Aggression Behavior on Youths: A Case study of Islam Abad-e-gharb.

Research Method: This article conducted based on quantitative method and survey technique and with questionnaire instrument among 19-30 years age old in the Islam Abad-e-gharb City. Sample contained 400 persons and selected through random sampling. Face, criterion and construct validity have been used to verify the validity and alpha coefficients to assess the reliability of the measurement. To test the hypotheses, Pearson correlation coefficient and analysis of variance were employed.

Findings: the Results of Research show that average of individual Conformity strategist's Score in Rational dimension was 21.55, in emotional dimension 37.42 and in evidences dimension 19.44, also average of individual aggression's score in offense dimension was 32.71, in Rage dimension 48.51 and Implacability dimension 28.65. This average according to F test in at least level %95 is meaningful.

Conclusion: findings show that people when use of emotional strategy against problems, indicate more Aggression from themselves in Invasion, Rage and Implacability. But in another tow strategies (Rational and evidences) for this dimensions are Setback, because people who indicate evidences strategy from themselves, have no reason for Aggression, Rather they Retreat from this behavior because they have no power to Contrast With that, Whereas for Rationality dimension people try to contrast with that are not by Violence and Aggression, Rather by Rationally and correct logical.


