This study briefly Study geological characteristics and distribution of the large metallogenic ore belt in Central Asia. Taking metallogenic districts of Balkhash as typical study area and combining multi temporal remote sensing data and field work results, With the constantly changing knowledge of the division of metallogenic belts and types and characteristics of metallogenic formations in adjacent regions of Xinjiang, the authors emphasize that in comparing the geology and mineral resources in Xinjiang with those in its adjacent regions it is necessary to gain knowledge of their research histories and seek to make such comparison based on ascertaining basic ore-controlling elements. In addition, Western Junggar of Xinjiang mineralization relates to Early Paleozoic continental, crustal accretion is quite importantly. All these belong to the characteristics of the Central Asian metallogenic megaprovince which must be fully considered in the comparative study. The study analysis the spectral characteristics of typical minerals and background geological information, putting forward the recognition way of mineral alteration and interference information. Secondly, we collected sample data after making uses of principal analysis to extract elementary iron, argillic and carbonation alteration information, and established kernel functions and other parameters (C,&#947;), built the training model which the SVM needed to process the whole study area. Finally, comparing with elementary abnormal information, we would get more accurate information. There are good coherence between the outcome and map of the deposits. To Arc GIS platform, cross-border metallogenic belt establishment of the Xinjiang main objective of the integrated model of large ore-prediction system, that the Xinjiang metallogenic belt ore concentration distribution of the prediction and mineralization element association show certain zonation from intrusive bodies to wall rocks. On the base of discussion o- - f the mineralization regularity and mechanism in Xinjiang is proposed.
