Introduction: Today, diabetes can be considered the most important social- economic and health concerns globally in which more than 170 million people through out the world and 4 million people in Iran have been afflicted. The afflicted people are most likely to be more vulnerable from suffering blindness, nephropathy, neuropathy, heart attacks and amputation problems than normal people in society. Consequently, due to the importance of the prevalence of diabetes and its complications, we decided to carry out this study aiming to prevent diabetic complications, by using the research finding. The study was carried out through the diabetic clinic in shahroud.

Methods and Materials: This is a descriptive study, carried on 340 diabetic persons visiting the diabetic clinics in Shahroud. The required data was gathered by fulfillingby questionnairs trough interviews and the results were analyzed using the statistical tests and SPSS soft ware.

Results: 240 Females and 100 males' subjects with the average age of 50.2 ± 15.2 were studied. It was detected that 87.9% and 11.8% of the patients were suffering from diabetic types II & I respectively. The average duration of affliction was 5.5 years, also affliction duration for %51.2 of the patients were about 5 years. Significant relationship between type II diabetes, BMI and education was found. %77.4 of patients had less than high school diploma. Finding shows that % 44.1 of patients with positive type II diabetes had some family background. By analyzing the result, it was observed that %77.3, %13.9, %33.5, %21.8, %12.7, 18.6 %5.9 of patients were suffering from neuropathy, nephropathy, retinopathy, digestive disorders, problem in organs, cardio vascular diseases and goiter respectively.

Conclusion: The results showed a high frequency of risk factors and the side effects among the diabetes. Therefore, it seem that, in order to reduce the side effects, public training is needed for everyone via mass media as well as face to face training can be conducted for the patients visiting the clinic hoping to reduce patient, families and society problems in general.

Key words: Diabetes, Prevalence, Diabetes side effects.

