To improve the behavior of building structures subjected to lateral loads, such as wind and
earthquake excitations, tuned mass damper (TMD) has been used extensively theoretically
and experimentally in previous researches. To increase the effectiveness of TMD mechanism,
different methods have been proposed to determine the optimal values of TMD parameters
including its mass, stiffness and damping. In using single TMD on the structures subjected to
external vibrations, the mistuning of TMD, variation of TMD damping and changes in
structural dynamic characteristics cause significant reduction in the effectiveness of TMD.
Multiple tuned mass dampers (MTMDs) have been proposed to overcome the shortcomings
of single TMD where each TMD has different dynamic characteristics. Based on the results of
different researches, it has been concluded that the performance of MTMDs is less sensitive
to uncertainty of structural dynamic parameters than that of a single TMD.
In the previous researches, for designing MTMDs on the linear structures subjected to various
external excitations, several methods have been proposed based on different kinds of design
criteria. In most of the proposed methods, to simplify the design procedure of MTMDs, some
limitations such as identical masses and damping ratios for TMDs or uniform distribution for
the frequency or damping of TMDs have been considered. Also these methods require
extensive numerical analysis. To generalize the design problem of MTMDs, in this paper, an
effective method has been proposed for optimal design of MTMDs on the multi-degree-offreedom
linear structures subjected to any desired excitation. In this method, an optimization
problem is defined for designing the optimal MTMDs. The minimization of the maximum
displacement of structure is considered as objective function and the parameters of TMDs are
considered as variables. Since the design problem includes a large number of variables, hence,
in this paper, it has been decided to use Genetic Algorithm (GA) for solving the optimization
problem.
To illustrate the procedure of the proposed method and also to assess the effectiveness of
MTMDs in improving the seismic behavior of structures, a ten–storey linear shear building
frame was subjected to white noise excitation and for different values of TMDs mass ratio
and TMDs number, optimal MTMDs were designed for minimizing the maximum
displacement of structure. To focus on the main objective of this paper and avoid the
complexity of the problem, TMDs were located on the top floor in parallel configuration. The
results of numerical simulations showed the capability of GA in solving complex MTMDsdesign problem with a large number of variables as well as the simplicity of the method under
any desired external excitation. Also it was concluded that increasing of the mass ratio of
TMDs could improve the effectiveness of MTMDs. To assess the performance of optimal
MTMDs under other earthquakes, which are different in characteristics with design record,
optimal structure-MTMDs was tested under near-fault and far-fault earthquakes and the
results have been reported.
