On behalf of the Technical Program Committee, we welcome all of you to the IEEE International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IEEE IWCMC 2011) in the beautiful campus of Bahcesehir University, Istanbul, Turkey! We are indeed delighted that this year´s IEEE IWCMC accomplishes its goal under the conference theme &#8220;Making Wireless Communities,&#8221; and continues its tradition of providing the premier forum for presentation of research results and experience reporting on the cutting edge research in the general areas of wireless communications and mobile computing. This year, we received more than 1000 submissions from 51 countries worldwide. Each paper received at least three peer technical reviews, comprised of 49 Symposia Chairs/Co-Chairs and a total of more than 450 TPC members from academia, government laboratories, and industries. After carefully examining all the received review reports, the IEEE IWCMC 2011 TPC finally selected about 35% high-quality papers for presentation at the conference and publication in the IEEE IWCMC 2011 proceedings. The conference program starts on Monday July 4<sup>th</sup> with a full day Tutorials that is free of charge to all our attendees. Then, each day starts with a keynote speaker chosen from renowned world-class leaders in the area-Dr. Rick Stevens, Dr. Mario Gerla, and Dr. Sajal Das, highlighting the latest research trends in the wireless communications, mobile computing, and networks. This year, the technical sessions reflect the continued and growing interests in a wide range of spectrum, including wireless communications and networks, cross-layer design and optimization, mobile computing, wireless sensor networks, network security, and use of wireless technologies in social emergency applications. We also added a special Workshop this year to address practical aspects of Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, such as Multihop Wireless Network Testbeds and Experiments, Network and- Communications for Advanced Society, and Federated Wireless Sensor Systems (FedSenS). There are five special sessions composed of invited papers from renowned experts from around the world. Outstanding papers will be selected for four Special Issues in well known international journals. Our objective in the future is to reduce the acceptance rate further to reach 30% and less. In addition, we would like to reduce the number of Symposia and Workshops as well to meet the conference theme.
