Rivers and streams are fully dynamic systems and their position, shape and other morphological characteristics are changing continually over the time. Due to the bank’s erosion and displacement of river banks, every year a great surface of agricultural lands, residential areas and bank facilities are being destructed. Different factors effect on the destruction of river floor and walls, including scour erosion of the banks, erosion and destruction due to entering agricultural drainage and so on. A group of factors such as waterway slope, flow rate, characteristics of bed materials, frequency and flood intensity determines the river morphology based on the time and spatial aspects. In this regard Leopold and Leman divided the rivers from morphological point of view in three groups of direct, meander and arterial. These patterns are also affected by these factors. Among these, meander pattern of the rivers as an effective parameter appears to be essential as a useful parameter to identify the hazards and the ways to conserve the existing resources and capital in different regions. This study investigated the lateral changes of the rivers that in the last years has threaten the communication path, agricultural lands and human structures besides the river banks, Therefore, due to the existence of bank erosion and morphological changes of the under study river, the aim is to study Hor rood River Geomorphology and its changes in a period of 52 years with a focuses on applied fields in different ranges of river engineering schemes. With this objective, identification of effective variables in bed instability for understanding the pattern of the river, changes trend, river path displacement in a long period of time and investigation of the factors and mechanism of bed changes is essential. And it was necessary that critical paths and parts of rivers have been detected concerning the bank erosion on the river. It was adapted by previous studies, calculated geometric parameters and field survey basis.
