Synthetic aperture radar (SAR) is a system of active prints that are loaded in a sensor able, to carry out the cartography of natural scenes with a better resolution. SAR supplies images based on the waves reflected by the Earth´s surface that do not appear on classical optical images. Indeed, radar waves may describe drifted ice in aquatic surfaces; they can penetrate under vegetation and even slightly into the basement. However, the main problem with this approach is the interpretation of the radar image that is different from usual graphics. When the radar is composed of a simple antenna, we speak about a monochromatic configuration. The antenna works in alternative it will function as a transmitter and then switch to a receiver. The radar can be designed to operate with two separate antenna to perform the transmit and the receive functions, and this may be called bistatic radar. The bistatic system has particular features coming from the separation between the transmitter and the receiver. In this configuration, the transmitter illuminates the scene with beam pointed to its centre. The diffused signal is then picked up by the receiver. Technological progressions enabled to place the receiver and the transmitter aboard satellites, ships, planes or other carrier. The delocalisation of both the transmitter and receiver makes it possible to improve the capacity of detection and identification of the radar, and thus to increase the detection capacity of a furtive target. This paper presents the potential scientific objective of the bistatic synthetic aperture radar (BISAR). First, it begins by an extension of modelling, proposed by literature such as monostatic scalar radar model and vertical model (that take in account the polarisation wave in the transmitter and the receiver) are presented. Then, the next part will be devoted to the development of two bistatic methods that are an extension of monostatic approaches. Namely, method of coherent summation and method o f adapted filtering.
