Abstract1
Water and temperature are determinant factors for seed germination. Both factors
can, separately or jointly, affect the germination percentage and germination rate.
The effect of temperature on germination and water potential on germination can
often be described by the thermal time and hydrotime models, respectively.
Additionally, the thermal time model and the hydrotime model have been combined
into a hydrothermal time model to describe the combined effect of water and
temperature on germination. The objective of this study was investigation interaction
effect of five levels of temperature (7, 10, 15, 20 and 25 °C) and five drought stress
levels (0, -0.2, -0.4, -0.6 and -0.8 MPa, by PEG-6000) on the germination of the
Velvetleaf plant (Abutilion thephrasti med.) and two soybean cultivars (DPX and
Williams) seeds. This experiment was done in during 2010 in the seed research
laboratory of Gorgan University of Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources,
Gorgan, Iran. Results indicated that the base temperature and the thermal time to
50% of germination (°Cday-1) in each three plants increase significantly with
decrease in water potential. Also, in low water potentials thermal time in the
Velvetleaf was lower than two soybean cultivars. The base water potential (from -0.9
to -0.6 MPa) and hydrotime to 50% of germination (from 1.4 to 10 MPaday-1) in
each three plants increase significantly with decrease in temperature from 25 to 7 °C.
Generally, in low temperatures of amount hydrotime in the Velvetleaf was lower
than two soybean cultivars. After fitted the hydrothermal time model the base
temperature, the hydrothermal time constant and the base water potential for
germination of the Velvetleaf, DPX and Williams were 3.9, 4.3 and 5.2 °C, 26.7, 26.5
and 27.3 MPa°Cday-1 and -0.9 MPa for each three plants, respectively. Results this
study indicated that Velvetleaf plant in conditions of drought stress and temperatures
similar had higher competition power than soybean cultivars studied.
Keywords: Germination rate, Thermal time, Hydrotime, Hydrothermal time, Modeling
