Folk medicinal practitioners are the primary health-care providers to substantial segments of the rural and urban population of Bangladesh. Their medicinal formulations usually constitute of whole plant or plant parts, which are administered either orally or topically in the form of decoctions, macerations, pills or tablets. Since the medicinal plants used by the practitioners, known locally as Kavirajes, vary considerably even between adjoining regions, it was the objective of the present study to conduct a survey among Kavirajes of three areas in Pirojpur district, Bangladesh to learn about the medicinal plants used by them in their formulations. Surveys were carried out with the help of a semi-structured questionnaire and the guided field-walk method. All plant specimens were identified at the Bangladesh National Herbarium. It was observed that the Kavirajes of the areas surveyed used 64 plant species distributed into 38 families in their medicinal formulations. The Fabaceae family contributed 6 species followed by the Rutaceae and the Solanaceae family with 4 species each. The Arecaceae, Asteraceae, and Combretaceae families contributed 3 species per family. Of the 64 plant species, used, 18 were cultivated for their edible fruits, 7 were vegetables, 5 species were planted for ornamental purposes, 5 species were cultivated for miscellaneous reasons, and 3 species were cultivated for use as spices. Leaves constituted the major plant part used (34.6% of total uses), followed by fruits (27.2%). 18 plants were used for treatment of gastrointestinal disorders including diarrhea, dysentery, constipation, and indigestion. 6 plants were used to treat arthritis; 5 plants to treat diabetes; 5 plants for treatment of skin disorders; and 4 plants were used to treat helminthiasis. 4 plants had veterinary uses, while 11 plants were used as preventive measures, either to keep the body healthy or to prevent diseases like chicken pox from occurring. Other ailments treated included respiratory tract infections, weakness, hepatic problems, heart disorders, edema, inflammation, tooth problems, cuts and wounds, fever, sexually transmitted diseases, urinary tract problems, piles, high blood pressure, menstrual problems, anorexia, snake bite, insect bite, pain, and malaria. Since plants have always formed a good source of modern medicines, taken cumulatively, the medicinal plants used by the Kavirajes can prove to be potentially important for further scientific studies leading to discovery of newer and more effective medicines.
