Folk medicinal healers (Kavirajes) form the primary health-care providers to the predominantly rural population residing in over 86,000 villages throughout Bangladesh. The Kavirajes treat various ailments with whole plants or plant parts from which they make simple decoctions or pastes, which are administered orally or topically. Their mode of treatment is simple, yet considerable variations exist between Kavirajes of even adjoining villages as to the species of plant chosen for treatment of any given ailment. The objective of the present study was to conduct a survey on folk medicinal use of plants in the village of Islampur in Natore district, Bangladesh and the villages of Itaghati and Ataibidir in Rajshahi district, Bangladesh, which are adjoining districts. Informed consent was obtained from the Kavirajes and surveys were carried out with the help of a semi-structured questionnaire and the guided field-walk method, where the Kavirajes pointed out medicinal plants during field-walks with the interviewers and pointed out their uses. A total of 87 medicinal plants distributed into 44 families were observed to be used by the Kavirajes of the three villages surveyed. The Fabaceae family contributed the highest number of plants (9), followed by the Solanaceae family (7) and the Euphorbiaceae family with 5 plants. Whole plants constituted the majority of uses (27.0%), followed respectively, by leaves (22.7%), roots (14.9%), seeds (9.2%), and fruits (8.5%). Other plant parts used included stems, barks, flowers, and tubers. The various ailments treated included helminthiasis, sexual disorders, respiratory tract disorders, pain, gastrointestinal disorders, skin disorders, urinary tract disorders, rheumatoid arthritis, snake bites, yellow fever, cancer, alopecia, cuts and wounds, paralysis, burns, malaria, cholera, gall bladder enlargement, diabetes, heart diseases, weakness, piles, obesity, placentitis, eye disorders, and hepatitis. Since a number of modern allopathic medicines owe their discovery to studies of medicinal practices of indigenous peoples, cumulatively these medicinal plants present significant potential for further scientific research leading to discovery of lead compounds and more efficacious drugs.
