A substantial section of the population of Bangladesh is poor and more than a third of the total population of 150 million people lives below the poverty line (i.e. having a daily income of less than US$ 1 per day). The poorer section of the population resides mostly in the rural areas and the urban slums. The rural population and population in small towns in addition suffer from proper access to health-care facilities and are not always in a position to afford the costs of allopathic treatment. They therefore rely on folk medicinal practitioners otherwise known as Kavirajes for treatment of their various ailments. The Kavirajes rely on administration of medicinal plants either orally or topically for treatment of diseases. Each Kaviraj has his unique repertoire of medicinal plants, which is closely guarded and usually passed onto an immediate member of the family in the successive generation. The objective of the present study was to conduct a survey on medicinal plant usage among selected Kavirajes of Barisal town in Barisal district, Bangladesh. Interviews were conducted with the help of a semistructured questionnaire and the guided field-walk method. Information was obtained as to the local name of plants, parts used, formulations and dosages. It was found that the interviewed Kavirajes used 49 plants distributed into 28 families in their treatment of various ailments. The Asteraceae, Fabaceae, Lamiaceae, and Moraceae families contributed 4 plans each, while the Solanaceae and the Verbenaceae family contributed 3 plants per family. The various plant parts used by the Kavirajes in their formulations included whole plant, leaf, stem, root, bark, flower, fruit, seed, and sap. Leaves constituted the major plant part used (34.8% of total uses), followed by roots (15.2%). Gastrointestinal disorders (stomach ache, constipation, dysentery, diarrhea) formed the major group of ailments treated by the Kavirajes and a total of 11 plants were used to treat these ailments. Eight plants were used to treat skin disorders, 7 plants for pain relief, and 6 plants for respiratory tract disorders like coughs and mucus. Other ailments treated by the Kavirajes included urinary tract problems, cuts and wounds, meho (a term used by the Kavirajes to indicate urinary problem arising from endocrinological disorders or diabetes), fever, skin disorders, malaria, rheumatism, dog and snake bites, hepatic disorders (jaundice, enlarged liver), tooth infections, eye problems, heart disorders, diabetes, hydrocele, goiter, helminthiasis, menstrual problems, and fractures. Plants have always formed a rich source of modern drugs. The medicinal plants used by the Kavirajes need to be scientifically studied for phytochemical constituents and pharmacological activities towards discovery of lead compounds and more efficacious newer drugs.
