Bagerhat district is in the southern portion of Bangladesh and contains a portion of the world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sunderbans. The Rupsha River flows through the district and falls into the Bay of Bengal after passing through the Sunderbans forest. Because of the coastal position of the district and the presence of the Sunderbans forest, the plants occurring in this estuarine region are considerably different from the plants in other districts of Bangladesh. The occupations of the people of the villages adjoining the Rupsha River are mainly agriculture, agricultural laborer, and extracting timber and other forest products from the Sunderbans forest. In absence of modern medicinal facilities, the people rely on folk medicinal practitioners for treatment of their ailments. It was the objective of the present study to conduct a survey among the folk medicinal practitioners (Kavirajes) in two villages on the banks of the Rupsha River, namely Chanpur and Andabaaz, to learn about the medicinal plants used. The Kavirajes rely almost exclusively on medicinal plants for treatment of diverse ailments. Since the plant species of the Sunderbans forest are unique to the region, it was expected that the medicinal plants used by the Kavirajes of the two villages surveyed would be distinct from plant species used by Kavirajes in other regions of Bangladesh. Our survey revealed that 50 plant species and one mushroom species distributed into 32 families were used by the Kavirajes of the two villages. The Euphorbiaceae family provided 5 species, followed by the Araceae family with 4 species, and the Asteraceae, Combretaceae and Fabaceae families with 3 species, each. Even though the number of plant species used was small, a wide variety of ailments were treated by the Kavirajes. The highest number of plant species, twenty five, was used for treatment of gastrointestinal disorders. Skin disorders were treated with 22 plant species; respiratory tract disorders with 14 plant species, and sexual disorders treated with 11 plant species. Because the inhabitants of the two villages work often in the Sunderbans forest, they are exposed to snake and tiger bites. Ten plant species were used for treatment of snake bites, and six for treatment of tiger bites. Other ailments treated included heart disorders, sexually transmitted diseases, malaria, helminthiasis, rheumatoid arthritis, encysted dropsy, tuberculosis, hemorrhoids, hepatic disorders, cancer or tumor, fever, cuts and wounds, burns, epilepsy, anemia, obesity, menstrual disorders, gynecological problems, leprosy, inflammation, chicken pox, diabetes, paralysis, fistula, eye disorders, hypertension, typhoid, tooth problems, rabies, headache, and typhus. Three plants were used as astringents, four plants as tonic, one plant for treatment of vitamin C deficiency, three plants as antidote to poisoning, five plants as stimulants of the central nervous system, and one plant as an abortifacient. Two plants used to be prescribed for treatment of small pox, when the disease was still prevalent. Given the number of diseases treated and the uniqueness of a number of the plant species used for treatment, we conclude that it is important to conduct further scientific studies with these plants. Such studies have enormous potential towards discovery of novel drugs for treatment of a number of ailments, which cannot be treated currently with allopathic medicine.
