Folk medicinal practitioners (known otherwise as Kavirajes) form the first tier of primary health care for a substantial segment of the rural population as well as a considerable segment of the urban population of Bangladesh. Unlike allopathic doctors or other form of traditional medicinal practitioners (Ayurvedic, Unani, homeopathy), Kavirajes rely primarily on medicinal plants for treatment of various ailments. Since the medicinal plants used by the Kavirajes differ considerably from Kaviraj to Kaviraj, it was the objective of the present study to conduct a survey on medicinal plants used by the Kavirajes of six villages in Greater Naogaon district, Bangladesh namely, the villages of Kunjobon, Dimjayon, Harishchandrapur, Mohadevpur, Jamdoi, and Bagdob. It was observed that a total of 102 plants distributed into 54 families were used by the Kavirajes of the surveyed areas for treatment of diverse ailments. The Fabaceae family contributed the highest number of plants (11 plants), followed by the Euphorbiaceae and Asteraceae families (5 plants each), Apocynaceae, Malvaceae, Moraceae, and Solanaceae families (4 plants each), and Amaranthaceae, Combretaceae, Lamiaceae, Meliaceae, and Piperaceae families (3 plants each). Roots constituted the major plant part used (27.9%), followed by leaves (18.6%) and whole plants (15.5%). 16 plants were used for treatment of gastrointestinal disorders, 15 plants for treatment of impotency or loss of libido, and 12 plants for treatment of physical weakness or debility. Other ailments treated by the Kavirajes included fever, respiratory tract disorders, skin disorders, paralysis, jaundice, infections, leucorrhea, menstrual problems, urinary problems, anemia, vomiting, burning sensations in the body, snake bite, leprosy, tuberculosis, diabetes, cuts and wounds, piles, hypotension, kidney stones, tooth infections, pain, insanity, rheumatism, gonorrhea, ear disorders, and helminthiasis. The Kavirajes also prescribed plants for use against sorcery (black magic). 6 plants were used as blood purifier, which the Kavirajes believe to get contaminated through gradual accumulation of toxins and so lead to diseases, and 3 plants were used as appetite stimulant. Two plants had ethnoveterinary applications, being used to increase milk production in cows. Taken together, the plants offer considerable potential for scientific studies, which may lead to discovery of novel therapeutics as well as serve the purpose of preventive medicines or functional foods.
