Objective: increase of patient's rights observance is one of the important goals of therapeutic group activities which will have useful role in improving health of the patient. Meanwhile, many physicians play important role in providing better services. Most of the physicians imagine themselves in a position that they are authorized to determine destiny of their patients. In some cases, they have fatherly behavior toward their patients. Although they regard the patient as having sound mind and allows him to make decisions about him , they do for them what they deem fit. On this basis, we seek to answer this question that to what factors patient's right observance and better therapeutic services are subject and what strategies can help increase observance of patient's rights? Method: in this article, necessary information was gathered with use of references available in the libraries and sites in a quality type study and then some questions were constructed for interview. For this purpose, 20 patients, 10 patient companions and 10 physicians (40 persons) were interviewed in Tehran Shariat Razavi Hospital and participants have mentioned their experiences with regard to the raised subjects. All interviews were recorded and written and interviews analysis has been done simultaneously with writing the texts and with use of content analysis.

Findings: contents appearing in this study relate to increase of patient's rights observance in patients and their companions' view including participation of patient in decision making, allocation of enough time for listening to patient's talk, receiving mental support, respecting the patient's view, giving enough information to the patient, satisfaction with treatment, responsibility of physician to patient, right to ask patient and listen to reasonable answer by the physician , close communication of patient with physician and suitable feedback of the physician. Barriers to observance of patient's rights in physicians' view include low public culture, crowd of patients, lack of hospital equipment, small and ancient space of hospital, lack of labor and time, hard access to physician, incorrect procedures of treatment in private centers, regulations of hospital and overtime hours of physician.

Conclusion: the studied hospital depends on Social Security Organization. Generally, rights of patient in this hospital are observed in weak level. On the one hand, low public culture and lack of the patients' awareness with regard to provisions of Patient's Rights Charter which requires accurate planning in the field of education. On the other hand, lack of hospital equipment and manpower are regarded as barrier to increase of patient's rights observance with regard to crowd of patients and regulations of hospital and incorrect procedures of treatment in private centers. Paying attention to this attitude can help the authorities create better conditions with regard to needs and culture of the patients for increase of patient's rights observance.
