This essay is considered an attempt to present how "semiotic studies can be used as a perceptional aspect of interpretation of postmodern movement in reading architecture. Semiotics is the philosophical and scientific study of   semiosis: the relation of signification with sign, mind and object or more generally, the creation of meaning; But they both refer respectively to the theories of "Saussure" and "Peirce". According Saussure`s idea, the sign consists of two parts: a signified which is a concept, and a signifier which is a mental pattern of a sound or image. He has believed that the relationship between the signifier and signified is arbitrary. They are both whole cognitive and provide no form of external reference. "Peirce" claims that each sign consists of three inter-related parts: object, interpretation, representation. In postmodern textual point of view, every perception of text, exchanges to a new object. Actually the thought of post-structuralism such as postmodernism, uses different perspectives to create a multifaceted interpretation of a text, even if these interpretations conflict with one another. It is particularly important to analyze how the meanings of a text shift in relation to certain variables, usually involving the identity of the reader. Derrida believed that the absence of the transcendental signified extends the domain and the play of signification infinitely. Derrida’s alternate strategy was to de-center the text thereby increasing play and opening up the exploration of meaning. We are dealing here an approach of architecture and postmodern thought within field of semiotics. This is a shadowy zone closely linked to human nature in which we will have to convey descriptive sensations of what remain to be still discovered or analyzed. In every perception of architecture lies a vision which connects us to the signified. Because we have all our inner images, and due to human beings rising in different cultures, we live our own personal different resonances. The architecture includes some messages in its. In semiotics, a code is a set of convention or sub-codes currently in use to communicate meaning. To that extent, codes represent a broad interpretative framework used by both addressers and their addressees to encode and decode the messages. The appreciation or analysis of architecture and it`s spatial configuration is always seen between cognition, culture, knowledge and society. The appreciation, due to abstract representational configurations and geometrical pattern remain to be deciphering with great attention and care with structured distinguish of subjective/objective interpretations and reactive flexible meaning of perception’s consideration. The architecture has been consisted of different layers of meaning such as a text. These layers would make different  meanings and sense for project to be appear in the deepest plan. The spectator, according to his mysterious understanding, unveils the messages in layers of the text and also try to make interpret of it .We can divide all layers of the plan in two main groups: (a) corporal layers (b) supra corporal layers. The author`s messages at the plan and in the texture of the plan  which is contained with codes.
