The main objective of this project is to evaluate the seminary school of women in Yazd City through CIPP Evaluation Model. The research method in this study is survey. The operational procedure of the project enjoys a systematic viewpoint. In the evaluation of the field, the extent of the appropriateness of the objectives of the seminary school of the women was estimated through a survey among the professors of theology department, the professors of Shaid Beheshti Seminary School, and Nahad-e Rahbari (the institution of the supreme leader) of Yazd University. It was found that the objectives are appropriate. In the same way, the following sets were devised: six criteria for the evaluation of the field; seven criteria for the evaluation of the inputs including the students, teachers, etc.; eight criteria for the evaluation of the administrative procedures, teaching, learning and services; and two criteria for the evaluation of the output of the seminary school. In the next step, one or more indexes and standards were defined for each criterion. In order to determine the extent of the appropriateness of the twenty four devised criteria, the necessary data were gathered in eleven ways including: questionnaires, interviews, checklist, and students' educational records and files. The analysis of the data made it possible for the researchers to study the status of each criterion; so that the situation of the seminary school was compared with the relevant standards, according to which the extent of the appropriateness of the situation of each criterion was estimated at three levels of "appropriate", "rather appropriate", and "inappropriate", and in some cases the results were provided in a qualitative manner. In general, it can be said that the results of this evaluation can be helpful for the people in charge of seminary school of women in Yazd City so that they can improve their performance and increase the quality of their education; the results are also useful for the people in Qom who are responsible for the supervision of the seminary schools of women to strengthen the educational and cultural capability of the seminary schools of women.
