During the 2002-2003 academic years a decision was made at American University to reform the introductory general education science classes by increasing the number of credit hours from 3 to 4. The intent of this reform effort was to add more substance to the introductory courses by increasing the laboratory experiences offered, and to make them comparable in credit hours to most introductory science courses around the country. As a result of this reform effort, the introductory physics classes were required to double the number of laboratory activities performed by the students during a given semester. The main objective behind increasing the number of laboratory activities was to increase the hands-on experiences of the students for the various topics covered within the curriculum. Through an internal grant award from American University, a significant amount of new laboratory equipment was purchased in spring 2003 and a number of new laboratory activities were created during the summer of 2003. The design and development of the new laboratory activities are described as they relate to current research in physics education. The research in this field has clearly shown that student learning can be enhanced through the use of content-specific, interactive engagement (IE) strategies. Tips regarding the choice of equipment for the introductory physics laboratory will also be shared. In addition, the overall reform effort within the introductory physics classes and laboratories are presented through a discussion of effective pedagogical strategies. The new laboratory activities were successfully piloted with over 100 students during the fail 2003 semester. This paper highlights student and instructor experiences with the new activities during the pilot semester. A description of the newly-created laboratory activities through the lens of current research in physics education should provide faculty teaching laboratory-based, introductory physics or engineering courses with some useful ideas and techniques for reforming or refreshing their own courses.
