Introduction
From the fore past Tabriz Bazaar had many verity and powerful functions which protected a very vast national and international limited area. In recent decades the inattention of urban projects expose cadence it. Nowadays Tabriz bazaar has various roles such as historical and commercial roles as well as residential ones. In 421 hectare in total with surrounding areas, 13340 commercial units, production units which include 24 percent of all commercial units in Tabriz. This shows the density of different activities in this part of city, which provides the most needs of people. Furthermore, most of political departments such as governorship, governess, municipality and economical affairs organizations are located in this part. The presence of different activities in the area of Tabriz Bazaar have cause of the decreasing quality of commercial values. This study is tries to improve this fact that to revive of identity and book keeping of Tabriz Bazaar, it is necessary for changing and updating the existing land use not to build the new commercial units.
Tel: 09121594026
One of the main cartelistic of city in Islamic era was in their commercial structure which was located in the intensive sit by the consistently and uniformly set. Central Bazaar in Middle East Islamic cities were the economic center of gravity. They were the places of business, production and focal point of faith and policy. Before 1300 the Iranian cities had the clear tribute of these cities. In Islamic- Persian city Bazaar, Arg (government place) and holistic mosque were the main elements in city body, which by constantly interactive relation supported each other. Tabriz Bazaar has been one of the most important and grateful from the Islamic- Persian era till now. It has been the main business, manufacturing and international trade center of Persian Carpet. It has a good position in the national and international trucking to Europe 

transit. The objective of this study is to interest the urban planners and managers to pay more attention to protect and reduction the historic- cultural identity of Tabriz Bazaar in order to socio- economic dynamism and development of Tabriz itself. So we analysis the economic functions of bazaar and its effect on its purview.
Methodology
To understand and identify the importance of Tabriz Bazaar and its effects on purview as well, the authors have used descriptive and historical method. They studied Tabriz Bazaar's purview in two levels: regional and international. They used the gravitation and defection point models by using the population data of county cities and their distances from each other.
Results and Discussion 
Tabriz Bazaar has a central position in East Azarbaijan. It has many functions especially in commerce, tourism and recreation fields. It has dispelled the far regions settlements needs, which is biggest than its existing county sundries. As we know the extent of purview depends on the socio- economics and political powers of the central place. Tabriz as the only city in south west of Iran, has more than one million population. For its historical and geographical position it has an important socio- economic and political role in this region. The study of its purview in county and region show that its boundaries extent all the time in to its neighborhood counties. After the year of 1355 the extent of its purview has moderated progressively. It came down in 1385 to 64/6 percent from 68/7 percent in 1345. One of the reasons of that was the increasing of population density in central cities of its neighborhood provinces, like Ardebil, Oromia, Zanjan and Sanandaj. The results of this study show that the compacting of Tabriz bazaar functions are caused centralization of some functions like services and carpet industries in the historic center of Tabriz. Therefore the most suitable way for achieving sustainable development in Tabriz is: declining the compacting functions and increase the competition between trades and antagonistic activities.
The analyses of Defection Point Model also show that the dominance of Tabriz has an important effect on the urban hierarchy and system of county.
Conclusion
The centralization of activities in Tabriz is the most important characteristic of spatial distribution of service in this province, and south west of Iran as a whole. The regional, national and international realm of Tabriz is very brood. The miscellany of Tabriz Bazaar and its surrounding areas by 427 hectare vastness is 3 percent of Tabriz. It includes 13340 commercial and 1990 production units, which involve the 24 percent of commercial and production activities in Tabriz. The 50 percent business of commercial units of this city is down in this district. This means that the massive action in this zone.
Tabriz Bazaar has also the variety of functions like historical, cultural and so on. It attracts more than 40 percent of daily travels Tabriz. It is expected by empowering of Ardebil and Oromia the firstly city phenomena of Tabriz will be ended next 10 years.

