Aim: The aim of this paper is to identify the definitions provided for the word "record", to qualitative¬ly evaluate the usage domain of each definition and to study the possibility for offering a comprehen¬sive definition for "record", regardless of the special definition and usage domain of each word. The other objective of this research is to discuss the definition of "record" from the viewpoint of archives. Methodology/Approach: This research uses the library method. In this article, relevant resources are identified and the definitions provided for records are collected, categorized and critically studied. In this method, the definitions and their range of application are qualitative studied. Findings: the findings of this research show that the word "record", in addition to its general meaning, has been used in the administrative literature of Iran and in different disciplines. This has caused this word to have various applications and therefore sometimes there have been some misunderstandings between different users. When the special meanings of "record" are intended, this differences and varieties in definitions are more evident.
1. Instructor of Ancient Culture and Languages, the National Library and Archives of I.R. Iran greazizi@gmail.com
 
Limitations: in previous research on the study of records, the definition of record has not been dis¬cussed independentiy and comprehensively. As indicated in its references, in this research the required information was collected from resources of various disciplines including archival studies, library and information science, administrative science, commerce, law, politics, history and anthropology. Value: in the present paper, the word "record" and its application in different disciplines of knowl¬edge (in Persian) are discussed. In addition to identifying different definitions, the possibility for the interdisciplinary use of these definitions is studied. This is while this issue has not yet been studied with this approach and this broadness. This paper, which is related to the field of semantics, will help researchers in further studies in identifying types of records and defining different archival material and resources.

