Objective: microRNAs (miRNAs) are a new class of non-coding RNAs involved in regulating
various biological processes including proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis,
among others. Alterations in miRNA expression are reported in several human cancers,
which suggests their potential roles in tumor initiation and progression. Members of the
miR-302 cluster are highly expressed in embryonic stem cells (ESC), where they regulate
cell self-renewal and pluripotency. Based on the cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis,
mis-expression of such genes might contribute to tumorigenicity. This study aims to find a
potential link between the expression level of human/homo sapiens miR-302b (has-miR-
302b) and tumor/grade state of gastric tissues.
Materials and Methods: A matched based case-control study was conducted that included
tumor and matched marginal non-tumor surgical specimens from 34 patients diagnosed
with gastric adenocarcinoma. Randomly selected samples were obtained from
the Iran National Tumor Bank. cDNA synthesis was carried out on total RNA, by using
the miRCURY LNA™ Universal RT microRNA PCR Kit. Real-time reverse transcriptionpolymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays were performed with specific LNA™ primers
and SYBR Green master mix. The human embryonic carcinoma cell line, NTERA2 (NT2)
and a human gastric adenocarcinoma cell line, AGS, were used to optimize the PCR reactions.
A comparative evaluation of miR-302b expression in tumor and non-tumor gastric
samples was performed by either paired t test or Wilcoxon non-parametric test. The ability
of miR-302b to discriminate tumor from non-tumor gastric samples was evaluated using
the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve.
Results: According to our data, miR-302b expression (normalized to that of the U6 snRNA
housekeeping gene) in the pluripotent cell line NT2 was more than 500 times greater than
that of the AGS cell line. The level of expression was even lower in tumor and non-tumor
gastric tissue samples. The data further revealed a down-regulation of miR-302b in gastric
tumor samples (p=0.001), particularly in high-grade adenocarcinoma (p=0.009). However,
ROC analysis data demonstrated a low sensitivity and specificity of miR-302b expression
to discriminate between the tumor and non-tumor state of the samples (AUC=0.63).
Conclusion: Despite the upregulation of some hESC-specific genes in tumors, our data
revealed a down-regulation of miR-302b in high-grade tumors. This data suggested a potential
tumor-suppressor role for miR-302b in tumorigenesis of gastric tissue.
