Objective: Age-related changes occur in many different systems of the body. Many elderly
people show dysphagia and dysphonia. This research was conducted to evaluate
quantitatively the morphometrical changes of the hypoglossal nerve resulting from the
aging process in young and aged rats.
Materials and Methods: Through an experimental study ten male wistar rats (4 months: 5
rats, 24 months: 5 rats) were selected randomly from a colony of wistars in the UWC. After
a fixation process and preparation of samples of the cervical portion of the hypoglossal
nerve of these rats, light and electron microscopic imaging were performed. These images
were evaluated according to the numbers and size of myelinated nerve fibers, nucleoli of
Schwann cells, myelin sheath thickness, axon diameter, and g ratio. All data were analyzed
by Mann-Whitney, a non-parametric statistical test.
Results: In light microscope, numbers of myelinated nerve fibers, the mean entire nerve
perimeters, the mean entire nerve areas and the mean entire nerve diameters in young
and aged rats’ were not significantly different between the two groups.
In electron microscope, numbers of myelinated axons, numbers of Schwann cell nucleoli
and the mean g ratios of myelinated axon to Schwann cell in young and aged rats were
not significantly different. The myelinated fiber diameters, the myelin sheath thicknesses,
myelinated axon diameters and the mean g ratio of axon diameter to myelinated fiber
diameter in young and aged fibers were significantly different
Conclusion: The mean g ratio of myelinated nerve fibers of peripheral nerves stabilizes at
the level of 0.6 after maturation and persists without major change during adulthood. This
ratio of axon diameter to fiber diameter (0.6) is optimum for normal conduction velocity of
neural impulses. Our study indicated that the g ratio of myelinated nerve fiber of the hypoglossal
nerve decreased prominently in aged rats and can be a cause of impairment in
nerve function in old age. Thus, prospective studies concerning electrophysiological and
conductive properties of the peripheral nerve could be useful to clarify further the effects
of aging on peripheral nerves.
