Objective: Evaluation of the effect of Propolis as a bioactive material on quality of dentin
and presence of dental pulp stem cells.
Materials and Methods: For conducting this experimental split-mouth study,a total of
48 maxillary and mandibular incisors of male guinea pigs were randomly divided into an
experimental Propolis group and a control calcium hydroxide group. Cutting the crowns
and using Propolis or calcium hydroxide to cap the pulp, all of the cavities were sealed.
Sections of the teeth were obtained after sacrificing 4 guinea pigs from each group on the
10th, 15th and 30th day. After they had been stained by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E),
specimens underwent a histological evaluation under a light microscope for identification
of the presence of odontoblast-like cells, pulp vitality, congestion, inflammation of the pulp
and the presence of remnants of the material used. The immunohistochemistry (IHC)
method using CD29 and CD146 was performed to evaluate the presence of stem cells and
the results were statistically evaluated by Kruskal-Wallis, Chi Square and Fisher tests.
Results: In H&E stained specimens, there was no difference between the two groups in
the presence of odontoblast-like cells, pulp vitality, congestion, inflammation of the pulp
and the presence of remnants of used material(p > 0.05). There was a significant difference
between the quality of regenerative dentin on the 15th and 30th days (p < 0.05): all of the
Propolis cases presented tubular dentin while 14% of the calcium hydroxide cases produced
porous dentin. There was no significant difference between Propolis and calcium
hydroxide in stimulation of dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs).
Conclusion: This study which is the first one that documented the stimulation of stem cells
by Propolis, provides evidence that this material has advantages over calcium hydroxide
as a capping agent in vital pulp therapy. In addition to producing no pulpal inflammation,
infection or necrosis this material induces the production of high quality tubular dentin.
