Objective: Several studies have shown that, although transplantation of neural stem cells
into the contusion model of spinal cord injury (SCI) promotes locomotor function and improves
functional recovery, it induces a painful response, Allodynia. Different studies indicate
that bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and Schwann cells (SCs) can improve
locomotor recovery when transplanted into the injured rat spinal cord. Since these cells
are commonly used in cell therapy, we investigated whether co-transplantation of these
cells leads to the development of Allodynia.
Materials and Methods: In this experimental research, the contusion model of SCI was induced
by laminectomy at the T8-T9 level of the spinal cord in adult female wistar rats (n=40)
weighting (250-300g) using the New York University Device. BMSCs and SCs were cultured
and prelabeled with 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU) and 1,1'-dioctadecyl-3,3,3',3'-tetramethylindocarbocyanine
perchlorate (DiI) respectively. The rats were divided into five groups
of 8 including: a control group (laminectomy only), three experimental groups (BMSC, SC
and Co-transplant) and a sham group. The experimental groups received BMSCs, SCs,
and BMSCs and SCs respectively by intraspinal injection 7 days after injury and the sham
group received serum only. Locomotion was assessed using Basso, Beattie and Bresnahan
(BBB) test and Allodynia by the withdrawal threshold test using Von Frey Filaments
at 1, 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 49 and 56 days after SCI. The statistical comparisons between
groups were carried out by using repeated measures analysis of variances (ANOVA).
Results: Significant differences were observed in BBB scores in the Co- transplant group
compared to the BMSC and SC groups (p <  0.05). There were also significant differences
in the withdrawal threshold means between animals in the sham group and the BMSC,
SC and the Co-transplant groups (p < 0.05).BBB scores and withdrawal threshold means
showed that co-transplation improved functioning but greater Allodynia compared to the
other experimental groups.
Conclusion: The present study has shown that, although transplantation of BMSCs, SCs
and a combination of these cells into the injured rat spinal cord can improve functional
recovery, it leads to the development of mechanical Allodynia. This finding indicates that
strategies to reduce Allodynia in cell transplantation studies are required.
