In this study evaluation and comparison of various interpolation approaches for estimation un-sampled values of soil Organic Matter Content (OMC) and soil texture is presented. The main objective is to develop a precision method for generation of management maps for variable rate application of herbicide that eventuate to save herbicide application and to reduce adverse impact on the environment. For this purpose after sampling of 42 points on the test field and generation of local and global grid of sample points on a PC, various interpolation methods were applied to estimate soil OMC and texture on un-sampled points by Surfer software. Inverse distance to a power, Kriging, minimum curvature, weighed moving average and radial basis function were used as interpolators. To evaluate the mentioned methods, cross-validation approach and two statistical parameters MAE and MBE were used. The results showed that minimum curvature method with MAE equal to 1.31 has the minimum error than other methods. In this method MAE value for sand, silt and clay was equal to 1.6, 1.18 and 0.59, respectively. In comparison with other methods, this approach had the minimum error. It was demonstrated that minimum curvature method was the best approach to estimate grid point values at un-sampled points. Finally after selection of appropriate method and using considered manufacturer recommendations of herbicide application based on OMC and soil texture, a digital management map of Cyanazine variable rate application in a corn field was generated. Based on this map and considering the herbicide uniform application in the farm as 1.7, 2.9 and 4 Lha-1, herbicide application rate compared with 1.8 Lha-1, decreases 39% and increases 4 and 50% respectively. This means that if the entire field is sprayed with the uniform rate of 1.7 Lha-1, Compared with1.8 Lha-1 which is obtained using management map, herbicide application will be saved 39 %. Similarly, if herbicide is applied 2.9 and 4 Lha-1 uniformly, compared to the amount 1.8 Lha-1, 4 and 50% of herbicide application will increase respectively.
