The present study investigated the relationship between organizational commitment and academic performance of students at female guidance schools in district no. 6 in Tehran. The study, with of a pragmatic objective, adopted a descriptive approach of correlation type. Participants of the study were 125 teachers. Instrumentation consisted Allan and Meyer's validated questionnaire for organizational commitment and a demographic questionnaire comprising personal details as well as the educational background of the teachers such as degree, age, experience, origin, education background, and type of employment. The average of each and every end- of- the- year grade of the students were calculated for the questionnaires filled up by the teachers. Method of data analysis consisted of Pearson moment correlation, non- parametric Spearman correlation as well as Analysis of multiple Regression (Stepwise Regression) all of which were done by utilizing SPSS package. The results reveal that: 1. There is a positive correlation between organizational commitment and academic performance of students. 2. There is a positively significant relationship between affective commitment and academic performance of the students. 3. There is a significant and positive correlation between continuous commitment and academic performance of students. 4. There is a positively significant relationship between normative commitment and academic performance of students. 5. There is a positively significant relationship between overall performance and educational degree of teachers, yet there is no positively significant relationship between overall commitment, work experience and age. 6. Results from Regression Analysis indicate that academic degree and native origin are of negative effect in making prediction of overall commitment, But employment status, work experience, age and major may not have a significant impact on the overall commitment of teachers. 7. Of the very three components of organizational commitment (affective commitment, continuous commitment, and normative commitment), the normative commitment is a significant predictor of the student's average grades.
