Introduction and research objective: Presently, the culture of economics in some countries is given top priority against other sectors of civilian economics. This important is not only due to the economical values of culture but also due to the outmost important effects which are able to boost the civilian economics both direct and indirect. In Iran also, the culture economics has its own specific importance and it includes industries such as cinema, theater, mass media, publications, tourism and sports. Among these, cinema industries as an attractive phenomenon is much more effective with compare to other cultural products and is considered as a center of attraction and interests not only by all the culture and art lovely people but also by the sensitive politicians and economists too. Unfortunately, cinema demand in Iran has been decreased during last 3 decades. Therefore, in view of such importance issue, this paper is aimed at estimating the function of demand for cinema in Iran based on the Iran's time series data during 1985-2007 periods.
Research Methodology: this research tries to use Case and Field Study Research Method. Also according to Classic demand theory and econometric models is used Ordinary Least Square Technique (OLS) for function of demand for cinema in Iran. This estimation is carried out by Eviews economical modeling package.
Findings: In this research we have selected the best linerly equation as function of demand for cinema in Iran after estimation some equations and tested them. Regarding cinema demand in Iran, average price of ticket, and income, we found all relevant test statistics indicate that there is relation between these variables. Here, cinema attendance in Iran (cinema demand) as dependent variable and other variables such as ticket price, population and income are independent.
Conclusion: We start our analysis with the specification of several approaches for cinema demand. According to calculation all of cinema demands elasticity, we analyzed the effective factors on cinema demand in Iran, such as iterance cost, consumers income index and population growth during 1985-2007 periods in this paper. However, in this study we found cinema demand to be inelastic and elastic with respect to price and income. Thus, cinema in Iran as cultural good from economic of viewpoint may indeed be seen as a luxury good.

