The city is the accumulation and integration of many individual and small group actions governed by cultural traditions and shaped by social and economic forces over time. The fabric and structure of today's city are outcomes of a process which has started many years ago and was shaped by numerous forces included historical, administrative, economic, political and social forces. Throughout history, design of streets and deliberate configuration of public spaces with buildings have reflected contemporaneous social norms or philosophical and religious beliefs. Yet the relation of designed urban space and human mind appears to be bidirectional. Indeed, the reverse impact of urban structure upon human behavior and upon thought is evidenced by both observational study and historical record. The fabric and structure actually have been working very well during the history; therefore, the city has been responsive for the needs and desires of inhabitants. On the other hand today's city fabric and image indicate heterogeneous in several aspects. In fact, a part of today's imbalance now appeared is due to inattention to such forces. As an example, beneficial commercial buildings have a little harmony and coincide with urban context and are of a contradictory relation with development plans. The ongoing dynamism of city changes makes it desirable for living. According the final researches, this paper gives an attempt to explain the forces in detail. It is believed that the quality of urban space is affected by how the forces interact together during the time. In this way, urban space could be described as the context of forces dialectic. This idea notices to the definition of "discourse" referring to Habermas's Theory of Communicative Action. The hypothesis of this paper is that for achieving a high quality urban space, it is required to make the context ready to welcome communication among diverse forces. To prove the hypothesis, some evidence from Iranian old cities is provided. To have a good design, it is required to employ the effects of all driving forces. Urban design concerns the arrangement, appearance and functionality of towns and cities, and in particular the shaping and uses of urban public spaces. Urban Design, in fact, is an activity that has an important role to play in delivering and safeguarding many of the aspirations that civilized societies hold dear - environmental sustainability, social equity, cultural diversity and economic prosperity. Therefore, urban designers should recourse from other professions included planners, economists, sociologist and urban managers. In fact, it requires a good understanding of a range from others besides, such as real estate development, urban economy, political economy, and social theory. The design, construction and management of public spaces therefore typically demands consultation and negotiation across a variety of spheres. Urban designers rarely have the degree of artistic liberty or control that sometimes offered in designing professions such as architecture. It also typically requires interdisciplinary input with balanced representation of multiple fields including engineering, ecology, sociology and transport planning. The scale and degree of detail considered various depending on context and needs.
