Formation of the informal settlements has become a global challenge in cities especially the ones in developing countries. These settlements encounter problems such as poverty, illegal land occupation, lack of infrastructures, low quality of house and etc. In the past few years, informal urban housing, and tenure insecurity have been attracting attention of the many global development organizations like UN_HABITAT, World Bank and so on. As such it leads to a steady stream of academic writings and new initiatives on the subject. Most of them intend to present solutions to solve land occupation security in order to improve living conditions in informal settlements. Recent studies believe that tenure security for low-income settlement dwellers encounter three distinct forms: tenure security as perceived by dwellers, tenure security as a legal construct and de facto tenure security. Nowadays there are two different approaches regarding the tenure security which as follow: traditional and modern approaches. Traditional approaches focus on tenure security more than legal aspect. These consider the occupation security as having title-deed for the official occupancy of a place. Although the modern approach does not negate the possibility that the title can generate tenure security, it argues that the same object can be achieved through different factors which have been called extra-legal and semi legal factors. There exists a distance between the idea of tenure security and the legal concept which has turned it into a social psychology issue. Social psychological approach shows that people's decisions are often influenced by what they feel about a situation.
Survey method is considered as the methodology of this research to achieve an objective and hypotheses test. According to this method, questionnaires was prepared and filled in Islamabad neighborhood. Finally, by using statistical techniques of factor analysis, Cronbachs Alpha, Pearson correlation analysis and multiple regressions, the main analysis of data completed. The social psychological approach is defined in a way which makes the concept of perceived tenure security. Through following these means, the same conception is shown to be composed of the perceived probability of eviction (a thinking state), the fear of eviction (a feeling state) and the lack of support networks, which are separate variables.
Within the results there are positive and direct relationship between housing quality and tenure security. Since other factors such as probability of eviction, fear of eviction and lack of support networks affect the perceived occupation security of households, the legal ownership is not the whole tenure Security in the neighborhood of the case study. Among these factors, lack of support networks influence the perceived tenure security of households much more than the other factors. Since informal settlements are key location of the urban poor to live, presumably the monthly income of households plays an essential role in tenure security and housing quality which can affects them. Therefore, it is recommended that the subsequent studies use the households monthly income as controlable variable in their tests in the future. The paper's outcome can be considered as the future studies' basis on the same subject.

