
Abstract
Objective: The purpose of this study is to investigate the effect of aerobic exercise on heart function and structure in diabetic Sprague-dawely albino species male rat.
Method: For this purpose 88 two-month-male rats, with mean body mass of 240± 6 gr, randomly were divided into four groups: control and sedentary ( CS n = 22), Training ( T n = 22), Diabetes and sedentary ( DS n = 22), and Diabetes and training ( DT n = 22). DT and T groups had 12 weeks aerobic exercise on treadmill. Each exercise bout included: warm up, running (Main training), and cod own. The training time and intensity progressed from 20min, 15 m/min, and reach to 60 min 25 m/ min, respectively at the end of exercise protocol. Five training sessions were included each week. In order to measure the levels of plasma glucose, HDL and cholesterol, Blood samples were taken from tail vein twice (at the start and end of exercise period). Heart tissue was taken from all groups before starting exercising and after it was finished. Then the heart weight, left ventricular weight, ratio of heart weight to body weight and ratio of left ventricular weight to heart weight were measured. Spss-13 software was used for statistical analysis of data. Statically method of ANOVA was used for data analysis and in the case of significant result (a<0.05) TUKEY test was used as follow test.
Results: The results of this study showed an increase of 27% and 50% in mass of left ventricular in DT and T groups respectively. Also significant decrease of cholesterol and glucose variables and significant increase of HDL variable were observed in DT and T groups respectively. The investigation results indicated a significant difference in mean heart rate changes among all groups.
Conclusion: According to these findings, it can be claimed that the aerobic exercise can cause some positive effects on the heart's function and structure in diabetic's patients (Increased Volume and left ventricular wall thickness and decreased rest heart rate). In spite of the increase in systolic blood pressure as a result of diabetes, exercise trainings can decrease this change to some extent. No significant differences were observed in the mean systolic blood pressure among all groups

