Mankind has always tried to find, manipulate and use the surrounding environment potentials to prepare a relatively comfortable place for his/her dwelling. In contemporary world, with respect to the existing hazards in relation to industries and development of the cities, and consequently overuse of energy, the architecture related to surroundings (vernacular architecture) for the sake of saving energy has gained a specific importance and has become the concern of various specialists and experts in architectural fields. Classificating and studying of various architecture at types can help us to better understanding its protection and accessibility to a variety of modern design that would be suitable for our global needs today. Troglodytic architecture is a kind of architecture which has drawn few attentions in professional organizations and academies. The mentioned architectural type has been used by our ancestors due to its thermal comfort, economical efficiency, safety against enemies and unsuitable climatic conditions. Troglodytic architecture for its diversity in various geomorphologies, natural settings and the possibility of different usage in various historical eras can be found in many shapes. It exists in a wide geographical spectrum. Based on the mentioned facts, for better understanding the differences and similarities of the type, classificating of different architecture-kinds is necessary. This article, which is a result of studying and analyzing many troglodytic architectural sites, is based on scientific methods. The objective of studying the available documents and many fieldworks is classifying this type of architecture and analyzing the various types and explaining their uniqueness. It became evident that in the recent years certain terminologies and classification had been created. In English language the term “man made cave” or troglodytic architecture, having root in French term “troglodytique” refers to a profound concept and meaning. Another existing term is “Rock architecture” which has been used in Iran (nowadays the “man made cave” term is more prevailing). Hand-carved architecture consists of all architectural creations that had been carved in mountains, rocks, hills or the earth. In conclusion, in relation to studying the architectural types, the results of this research show that in this type, the primary form of architecture is accessibility to a specific geomorphology (vertical or horizontal) and its functions are fundamental elements in creating such building and the specifications to their classification. Moreover, with reference to the existing classifications, their databases and diversities, the importance of troglodytic architecture had become a point of interest in many schools of thoughts. Evidently Iran holds many of this architectural type. At last, saving energy is an important element and has become the concern of various architects and experts in related fields. Researches showed that troglodytic architecture can widely be used as an alternative in buildings and structures, especially in accordance with saving energy, as well as protecting the natural landscapes. 
