Crime is a social problem in our society that affects thousands of people's lives each year, seriouse crimes against persons and properties generate considerable fear within the community. Crimes like theft, break - in, rape and murder are serious threats to the safety of the community. The resulting fear of crime in itself can restrict people's freedom of movement and prevent them from fully participating in the community. In particular, some groups of people are more vulnerable to crime and the fear of crime, for example, older people, women, parents, teenagers, ect.
Many different strategies are needed to combat the complex issues of crime and fear of crime. A whole range of responses involving strategies in design, community action and law enforcement would be required to achieve successfully the objective of crime prevention. In this connection, there is
159 • Vol.l The Studies Quartery of Deterrent Law Enfocement Abstracts
widespread acknowledgement that planners, architects and developers can play an important role in enhancing the safety of our communities as they have a major influence in the design of the built environment.
Traditionally,the community has turned to the police and the judicial system to protect them by deterring criminals and punishing offenders.The general public's indifference toward self-protection arises mainly from the lack of knowledge of the means of protection,and perhaps a perception that somebody else - the government or insurance companies bear most of the cost of theft and vandalism.
on the other hand,Crime Prevention Through Enviromental Design (CPTED)asserts that the community,homeowners,planners,developers and architects can play a greater role in protecting the community and themselves from crime by intergrating CPTED principles and concepts into the design and management of the physical enviroment.
In this connection,CPTED may be viewed as a subset of the total set of measures required for the effective crime prevention and control.
KEY WORD:society, serious crimes, community, murder, serious threats, safety, fear, restrict, freedom, responses, judical system, offender, Environmental Design, developers, architects, measure.

