The Intel Malaysia Electronic Packaging Higher Education Program Team is proudly one of the teams to benchmark among the industry for their engagement with Malaysian universities. This team was formed with the objective of collaborating with Malaysian universities to accelerate the advancement of research and curriculum to meet rapid technology changes in the area of electronic packaging materials whilst developing a pipeline of technical expertise (Master and PhDs post graduates) relevant to industry requirements. The team comprising of employees from Materials, Assembly Test Technology Development (ATTD-M) and Corporate Affairs has 4 focus areas/sub-teams: University Research, University Curriculum, University Technical Lecture Program &amp; Center of Research and Teaching (CORT). The University Research Team has engaged with 3 leading university faculties and has so far awarded &#8764; RM 4.9 Million in research grants focusing on various areas including nanotechnology, novel solder material, material surface modification &amp; new methodology in solder joint analysis. Research work in the recent years has produced over 40 international journals/conferences papers. Through the Technical Lecture Program, Intel delivered total of 150 technical lectures benefiting 8500 university students from 5 universities to promote the field of electronics packaging among university students, post graduates and academician. This program has encouraged university lecturers to initiate research in electronic packaging and also spurred interest in students to consider a career opportunity in Intel or the electronics industry in general. To take these university collaboration efforts to the next stage, Intel has selected Universiti Sains Malaysia´s Material Engineering Faculty to be established and recognized as the region´s center of research and training in electronic packaging. To kick-off these efforts, Intel has contributed RM 380,000 in grants to purchase equipment and c- - apabilities to conduct very specific research in nano-materials and solder material whilst developing local research and academic talents in this area. Overall, these efforts have clearly helped the Malaysian universities to establish research in the electronic packaging area whilst collaborating to incorporate electronic packaging subjects into the current undergraduate and post graduate syllabus. These efforts in university collaborations have clearly paid-off and there will be continued focused as it is essential in supporting the continuous growth of electronic packaging industry in Malaysia.
