Background and Objectives: Nitrogen lasers have many applications in medicine nitrogen in these lasers must be have a high purity. Using the air as active laser material is suggestive because nearly 75% nitrogen in air. Possibility of obtaining laser action in the air, because of cheap and availability of air, the air laser will have very application in Iran and the world. In this paper is trying to obtain laser action in the air as experimentally and theoretically. This laser is introduced as Air laser and is suitable for: "treatment of chronic non-responding tubercular lymphadenopathy and sinuses, starting of dye laser for treatment of vascular lesions , Low Level Laser Therapy (LLLT) in Multiple Drug Resistant Pulmonary Tuberculosis, The Biological Effect of Intravenous, Enhances the Biocidal Activity of Human Neutrophils on Internalized Bacteria, Inhibits the Growth of Wide Range of Microbes in Vitro, Treatment of Drug-Resistant Pulmonary Tuberculosis, change Growth of Candida Albicans Apoptosis of Human Polymorphonuclear Cell and Phagocytic Activity of Human Monocytes and etc" .

Methods and Materials: In the first step, is stadyed all nitrogen lasers. Then is investigated factors that influence in power output of nitrogen laser. With optimizing of effective parameters, is bilt efficient nitrogen laser. In this step, oxygen is injected to efficient nitrogen laser and is investigated behavior of laser output power. With changing of the effective paremeters in Efficient nitrogen laser, is tried to obtain laser action in high 02 percent in this step, air is injected to Efficient nitrogen laser. With changing of the effective paremeters in air laser, is tried to obtain laser action in every air presseture.

Result: With studying of all factors that influence in power output of nitrogen laser and performing them, the

pulsed air laser is built which work in air pressure at wavelength 337nm. In this laser, quenching of laser by

 

adding of 02 is investigated and is obtained the turning off PO2 pressure as a function of PN2. Also is calculated

the case of increasing output power in very low 02 percent.

Conclusion: With optimizing of nitrogen laser effective paremeters, the Air laser is bilt that work in air pressesures, less than, equal and large than atmospheric presseture.


