I There are many paths to reach God because He enjoys an infinite number of
I perfections and directions, and each person follows his own path to move towards Him. I Men of God, believers, and mystics all speak of the same truth; however, they use I different languages, words, and proofs.
L 
trans-substantial motion
being
quantity
 
Kheradname-ye Sadra / No.60 / Summer 89 

In terms of firmness and perfection, the noblest of all arguments on demonstrating the existence of God is one in which the middle term is nothing but He Himself In other words, it is one in which the end and the aim are the same. This is the same path and method of the righteous, who demonstrate the Necessary Being by means of the Necessary Being Himself The unique feature of the "argument of the righteous" is that there is no mediator for the demonstration of the essence of the Necessary Being in it.
It was Ibn Sina who used the term the "argument of the righteous" for the first time. However, it was Mulla Sadra who explained it on the basis of the fundamental principles of the Transcendent Philosophy in an innovative and most solid manner. His interpretation is superior to those of Ibn Sina and others in certain respects,
This argument was interpreted and presented in different ways after Mulla Sadra; however, the writer believes that, given its philosophical premises, Sabziwari's interpretation is the shortest, and, given its objective reality and Heedlessness of philosophical premises, 'Aliamah TabatabaVs is the most direct one. The interpretations known as the arguments of the people of knowledge and theology (kalam) suffer from formal and content-related problems. Moreover, most of their discussions refer back to the principles and consequences given by Ibn Sina and Shaykh al-Ishraq, These interpretations did not create a basic change in the presentation of arguments on the demonstration of the Necessary Being. Therefore, Mulla Sadra's is the soundest, firmest, and most problem-free argument on the demonstration of the existence of God.
This paper has accomplished two tasks: 1) A study of the different interpretations and explanations of the argument of the righteous; 2) a comparison, critique, and examination of these interpretations in terms of their solidity and comprehensiveness to be used for the demonstration of the essence of the Necessary Being based on the same argument.

