ABSTRACT:
Introduction & Objective: Cardiovascular disease and hemodialysis incompetence are the main factors determining the disability and mortality in dialysis patients. Increasing in adequacy of hemodialysis is quite effective in patients' prognosis. There are several methods for evaluating the adequacy and need of hemodialysis. One of these methods is the assessment of KT/V in patients. This study aimed to determine the adequacy of hemodialysis patients in hemodialysis units in Kohgilouyeh and Boyerahmad hospitals.
Materials & Methods: This was a cross-sectional descriptive study which was conducted at Yasuj University of Medical Sciences in 2009. The study population included all patients under hemodialysis. In this study, 41 patients were eligible for study in hemodialysis units. From all patients, before and after hemodialysis, blood samples were taken and blood urea nitrogen and creatinine were measured. KT/V and URR were used for the evaluation of dialysis adequacy. Collected data were analyzed by descriptive statistics (mean, standard deviation) and inferential (one way ANOVA test and t-test) using the SPSS software.
Results: Results of this study showed that the mean BUN of patients before dialysis was 69.9 ± 23/6 and after that was 32/63 ± 11/96. Minimum KT/V, 0.45 and a maximum of 1.77 with average was 0.94 ± 0.4. Considering the standard KT/V, 17 patients (41.5 percent) with optimal dialysis adequacy, 3 patients (7.3 percent) near-optimal rate and 21 people (51.2 percent) were less than optimal. The minimum URR was 28% and the maximum was 75% with an average of 50% ±0.69 respectively. Considering the URR criteria, 11 patients (26.8 percent) with optimal dialysis adequacy, 10 patients (24.4 percent) near to the optimum level and 20 patients (48.8 percent) were less than optimal.
Conclusion: in view of the standard KT/V and URR, much of the patients had inadequate hemodialysis at these hemodialysis centers. Because of the direct connection between the clinical status and adequacy of hemodialysis and mortality, evaluation of the related causes is necessary.
Key words: Hemodialysis, Adequacy of Dialysis, Kt/V, URR 


