Job recruitment and selection process is one of the most tedious tasks that human resource department in every organization has to perform. The recruitment and selection process consists of several steps. This paper focuses mainly on the step in which the applicants have to fill out application forms and undergo an initial screening interview. This step is very important because human resource recruiters must choose qualified candidates out of many applicants to be interviewed with the supervisors responsible for the job. Recruiters of many companies face a lot of problems performing this step especially when they have to perform it manually. Thus we were motivated to develop a more efficient way in filling out and processing application forms and develop job application support system to aid interviewers during the preliminary interview process. Job application support system consists of three main components including electronic application form, electronic telephone interview and electronic interview. The application module is constructed based on the competency matrix derived at each level of employment. Interview questions are determined based on the chosen competencies and are used to screen out candidates during a competency-based behavioral interview. A quantitative multi-objective decision model and job assignment model are developed for job-applicant matching process. The models are used to manage the data from the job application forms and evaluate the results from job interviewers. Job application support system is expected to bring about many positive changes. It can speed up the recruitment process by filtering out unwanted applicants and allow a better facilitation of the interview process by providing interviewers with guidelines and forms with which they could fill out. Cost can be saved because there are less paperwork. The quantitative multi-objective decision model and job assignment model that are developed can provide a more efficient way for j- - ob-applicant matching process
