Background and Objective: Osteoporosis is a systemic skeletal disorder, characterized by reduction of bone mass, deterioration of bone structure, increasing bone fragility and fracture risk. Prevention of osteoporosis is one of the most important issues in World Health Organization programs. By now, there has not been no researshs on preventive strategies for osteoprosis in pregnant women,therefore, this study aimed to evaluate effectiveness of HBM model in osteoprosis prevention among pregnant mothers referred to Arak health centers.

Materials and Methods: In this quasi-experimental study, one hundred and fifty pregnant women participated.The subjects divided into two groups, i.e., experimental and control (each group contained 60 women). Data collected with a questionnaire based on HBM and checklist about pervention of osteoprosis in order to evaluate the effectiveness of education program.Before intervention, questionnaires were completed. Then the educational intervention was performed. Educational intervention in the form of four training sessions using lectures, group discussions, dialogue, and training packages (posters, pamphlets and pictures). After one month, data were gathered again and then analized.Results: The mean age of case and control groups were 26.7 ± 4.7 and 23.4 ± 4.4 years respectively and mean duration of gestation was 23.2 ± 11 and 23.4 ± 10 weeks respectively and there was no significant difference between them (p>0.05). Research findings showed that knowledge and self-efficasy health behavior action for osteoprosis pervention were in low stage. After intervention, perceived barriers decreased in case group and pregnant mothers and health behavior action for osteoprosis pervention increased.Conclusion: With knowledge, perceived susceptibility, severity and benefits and self efficasy increased, perceived barriers decreased and health behavior action for osteoprosis pervention increased. So, this model is suggested for other health centers.

