We would like to welcome you to the IEEE International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IEEE IWCMC 2013) in the beautiful city of Cagliari, Sardinia, Italy (inside the campus of the University of Cagliari)! We are delighted that this year´s IEEE IWCMC accomplished its goal under the conference theme &#8220;Connectivity Everywhere,&#8221; and continues its tradition of providing the premier forum for presentations of research results and experience reporting on the cutting edge research in the general areas of wireless communications and mobile computing. This year, we received more than 630 submissions from many countries around the world. Each paper received at least three peer technical reviews, comprised of more than 480 TPC members from academia, government laboratories, and industries. After carefully examining all review reports, the IEEE IWCMC 2013 TPC finally selected about 35% high-quality papers for presentation at the conference and publication in the IEEE IWCMC 2013 proceedings. The conference program starts on Monday July 1st with a full day of Tutorials that are free of charge to all attendees. Then, each day starts with a keynote speaker chosen from renowned world-class leaders in the area: Dr. Lajos Hanzo, Dr. Robert Schober, and Dr. Daniele Franceschini, highlighting the latest research trends in cooperative wireless communications, how much can we gain by exploiting buffers in wireless relay networks? And giving the industry´s perspectives and overview on key technology milestones in the Ultra Mobile Broadband evolution path. This year, the technical sessions reflect the continued and growing interests in a wide range of spectrum, including wireless communications and networks, design and optimization, mobile computing, wireless sensor networks, network security, cloud-assisted computing and pervasive services and use of wireless technologies in different social applications. There are two special sessions composed of- invited papers from renowned experts from around the world. Outstanding papers will be selected for four Special Issues in well known international journals. Our objective in the future is to reduce the acceptance rate further.
