Consuming the narcotics by the juveniles is one of the most important hygienic and psychosocial challenges of the societies. The present research has been applied with the objective of analyzing the causation model, the relationship between parental factors, peers, confronting mode, self-esteem and aggression through consuming the narcotics by the juveniles of Karaj. The participators in the research included 447 persons (239 girl and 208 boys) from among the students of secondary education course of Karaj that were elected through random cluster sampling. The research instruments included micro scales of emotional bond with the parents and the status of peers group of questionnaire of risk-taker and protector factors of narcotic consumption (RAPI), questionnaire of hazardous behaviors, aggression questionnaire, and Rosenberg’s scale of self-respect and questionnaire of coping with stress. (CISS) Route analysis method has been applied for evaluating the Causation  model originated from social learning model of narcotics consumption by the juvenile (Simon and Robertson, 1989).Based on the goodness fitting indices (Chi’s non-significance, low error etc.), upon controlling the hypothesis of remained variance fixing, the supposed model contained perfect fitting. According to these results, the variables of communicating with deviant peers and aggression had direct relationship and parental rejection had indirect relationship with narcotics consumption. As well, parental rejection had direct relationship with aggression, self-respect and communication with deviant peers. Communication with the deviant peers and aggression in addition to having direct relationship with narcotics consumption by the juveniles, is mediator between the relationship of parental rejection and narcotics consumption. Familial risk-taker factors such as parental rejection, aggression and communication with the deviant peers is one of the most important variables forecaster of narcotics consumption by the juveniles. Therefore, designing the preventive interventions for improving the relationship of the juveniles with their health peers and reinforcing the emotional bond of juveniles with the parents and reduce of juvenile’s aggressive behaviors may reduce or prevent the consumption of narcotics by them.

