Background and Objective: Menorrhagia is defined as menstrual blood loss of greater than 80 ml per cycle. Heavy menstrual bleeding is a common cause of iron deficiency anemia may affect woman's quality of life. Considering importance of menorrhagia, the present study was designed to determine the effect of Vitamin E in the treatment of menorrhagia in patients with DUB.
Materials and Methods: Sixty-two women were selected for the study (aged 20-45 years, BMI= 19/8-29 and regular menstruation). Patients who had systemic disease, abnormal pelvic ultrasound, abnormal pap smear or have used hormonal contraceptives, IUD, TL, breast feeding and had serum hemoglobin levels lower than 10 g/dl were excluded. Participants were given 400 IU vitamin E or placebo per day, beginning two days before the expected start of menstruation and continued through the first three days of bleeding and 50 mg ferrous sulfate, from the beginning of menstruation for 7 days. Treatment was continued over four successive menstrual periods. Menstrual duration and amount of MBL were measured using a validated Pictorial Blood Loss Assessment Chart (PBLAC). Hemoglobin assessment was performed both at the beginning and at the end of treatment. Patients' satisfaction and acceptability were also assessed at the endpoints of treatment. 
Results: Results indicated that PBLAC scores and menstrual duration in the two groups were reduced after the treatment. There were no statistically significant differences between to PBLAC scores after two months (P= 0.342) and four months (P= 0.568), Also, no difference was observed in the menstrual duration after two months (P= 0.738) and four months (P= 0.842) between the groups. In vitamin E group "patient satisfaction" (P=0.004), "desired future treatment"(P= 0.020) were higher than placebo. 
Conclusion: The results indicate that, vitamin E in comparision to placebo was not effective on menstrual blood loss and menstrual duration reduction. However, since vitamin E relieves menstrual symptoms such as dysmenorrhea, menstrual migraine and it reduces emotional stress moreover, vitamin E has no side effects; These may contribute to high satisfaction and acceptability in vitamin E group. 

