In order to assess the availability of phosphorous (P), different methods have been proposed in the last decades. The results of these methods in soils with various pH, calcium carbonate, organic matter, Al and Fe oxides and hydroxides and other properties especially in Iranian soils can not be used. In addition, knowledge about transformation of P forms is necessary for perception of P behavior. The objective of this research was to study the relationship between P extracted by some extract ants and soil properties and, different forms of inorganic P. Therefore 20 soil samples were collected from 0-30 cm depth of Glosetan province soils. Soil P was extracted and measured by sodium bicarbonate at pH = 8.5 (NaHCO3), DTPA- Ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3-DTPA), DTPA- Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3-DTPA), and 0.01 M CaCl2. Also, different forms of inorganic P in the studied soils were measured by Jiang and Gu sequential fractionation method. The results showed that the amount of P extracted by different extract ants was in the order NaHCO3  >  NaHCO3-DTPA  >  NH4HCO3-DTPA  >  CaCl2. There was a significant correlation between P extracted by different extract ants and determination coefficient between P extracted by NaHCO3 and NaHCO3-DTPA, NaHCO3 and NH4HCO3-DTPA, and NaHCO3-DTPA and NH4HCO3-DTPA were 0.91**, 0.85**, and 0.82** respectively. P extracted by NaHCO3, NH4HCO3-DTPA, and NaHCO3-DTPA with pH, EC, clay and Calcium carbonate percentage had a negative and significant correlation, but with Organic matter it was significant and positive. Also among the P forms only di, octa and Al oxides P had a significant correlation with P extracted by studied extract ants. In general the distribution of inorganic P forms in these soils was as below: Ca10-P  >  Al-P  >  Ca8-P  >  Fe-P  >  Ca2-P  >  Fe- Occluded-P. According to significant correlation between P extracted by studied extract ants with some P forms it seems that, some P forms can be transferred to available form of plants. 
