Cold water filaments have important implications in the biological and chemical exchanges between the coastal and offshore ocean. The Cape Sao Vicente area in the Southwest coast of Portugal is a well know region where such phenomenon is observed. In October 2004, the multidisciplinary project ATOMS, involving oceanographers and acousticians, was conducted with the objective to complement the sea surface temperature (SST) satellite observation with a full water column characterization. Due to weather and technical conditions during the project sea trial, only CTD measurements in upper layers of the water column were performed. These at sea collected data together with archival data from the NODC database, allowed to establish a realistic scenario of the 3D temperature distribution in the area, including deeper water layers. Archival data of temperature profiles suggest the occurrence of other important oceanic phenomena such as the subduction of warm Mediterrenean water, that should also influence the acoustic propagation. With the help of forward acoustic modelling the significance and signature of the individual oceanographic phenomena on the acoustic propagation, regarding different sampling strategies of the area by acoustic means is investigated. These investigations allowed to develop strategies to settle the main problem addressed by this work: invert the cold water filament structure by acoustic means in a complex environment where acoustic propagation is affected also by other important oceanic and bathymetric features. Since, the objective of this work, is to evaluate the ability to perform a 3D characterization of vertical structure of the ocean, a minimal transmit-receive acquisition composed of a suspended source from a ship and a drifting vertical array, is assumed. The spatial structure is obtained by a combination of inversions for "mean" sound speed/temperature perturbations obtained for source-array cross-sections covering the area of interest. Mat- ched-field and ray tracing based tomography techniques are used in the inversion for the "mean" perturbations. The planned sampling strategies and necessary acoustic equipment to resolve such oceanic features is discussed having in mind future sea trials.
