Objective:
Mumps infection is endemic in Iran and mumps parotiditis is a
common disease in Iranian children. There has been a dramatic
decrease in the worldwide incidence of mumps since the introduction
and use in 1968 of the very effective and inexpensive mumps vaccine.
In Iran probably due to a higher percentage of unvaccinated young
persons  < 15yr, the incidence rate of mumps infection and its sequela
are higher in comparison to corresponding data from developed
countries prior to comprehensive vaccination programs. The aim of
the study was to investigate the effects of the mumps virus on cochlear
function and to determine the frequency of related Sensory Neural
Hearing Loss (SNHL) in children.
Material& Methods:
This descriptive case-series study was conducted in 94children, aged
less than 14 years, hospitalized between 1999 and 2001, in the
pediatric ward of the Hazrat Rasool Hospital in Tehran. All patients
with documented mumps infection (specific mumps-IgM antibody)
were evaluated twice for audiometeric function on the basis of
diagnostic parameters for sensory neural hearing loss; the first evaluation
was done on admission and the second three weeks later. 54 patients
(age range 1-14y, mean age 4.83±3.93, male: female ratio30:24)
were studied in two years.
Results:
The highest incidence of mumps was seen in winter (37%) and spring
(28%) and the lowest in summer (13%). Specific IgM antibody for
mumps virus was detected in 74 children. Comprehensive audiologic
evaluation was done in 54 patients at admission and again 3 weeks
later. SNHL was detected in 7.2% of patients; the 4.4% incidence of
SNHL in this study was higher than in other studies in developed
c o u n t r i e s   p r i o r   t o   c o m p r e h e n s i v e   v a c c i n a t i o n   p r o g r a m s .
Conclusion:
Implementation of comprehensive vaccination programs in young
Iranians could dramatically reduce the burden and costs imposed by
the infection and its sequelae
