Background: The Patterson-Parker table was created in 1934 to determine mg-hr
required to deliver the prescribed dose to the treatment area. These tables were created
using the dosimetric data for 226Ra that was determined in air and were utilized
for dose calculations around implants with Ra-equivalent radionuclides such as 137Cs
and 192Ir. Therefore, the differences of the tissue attenuation and anisotropy of these
radionuclides and their impact on dose uniformity of the implants were ignored.
Objective: In this study, the Patterson-Parker table has been updated for 137Cs
and 192Ir sources using their recent dosimetric data. Furthermore, the dose uniformity
for different loading schemes, as a function of the implant area, was tested.
Methods: The updated Paterson-Parker tables were generated for 137Cs and 192Ir
sources using their published dosimetric parameters that have been determined following
the American Association of Physicists in Medicine (AAPM) Task group 43
(TG-43U1) recommendations. The accuracies of the updated tables were examined
by two independent methods, Monte Carlo simulation technique and a commercially
available treatment planning system. In addition to the dose values along the central
axis of the implant, dose profiles along two orthogonal directions were evaluated for
the selection of the optimal radioactivity distribution in an implant.
Results: We found that the original Paterson-Parker loading scheme of the radioactivity
as a function of the implant size has to be adjusted to achieve the optimal
dose distribution (1000 cGy ±10%) in an implant. In addition, it was shown that the
same implant size for the mg-hr required for 137Cs was not identical to that of 192Ir.
Similarly, there were some differences between the updated table and the published
Paterson-Parkers tables. Independent Monte Carlo simulations and treatment planning
data had excellent agreement with the updated data.
Conclusion: The conventional version of Paterson-Parker tables are not useful
for the two commonly used brachytherapy sources. The updated version of the tables
should be used instead.
