General sharing of information resources on the Internet has already be achieved through Internet technology. But the goal of grid is trying to achieve a comprehensive connectivity and sharing for all resources on the Internet, providing high-performance computing services for users. In this paper, grid resource scheduling was studied and according to the current research about it some innovation and improvement for it were made from the following aspects. The first was innovation in architecture. Because of that the architecture of the Internet is formed of a large number of autonomous system (AS) and each AS is run by different organizations, in order to be appropriate to the architecture of the Internet´s autonomous system, a grid resource scheduling system architecture model based on multi-polar autonomous system was designed, where distributed management and centralized management were combined in the model. In internal AS, resource management and scheduling could make use of two-stage structure in the form of region and backbone region. A distributed structure was used among AS, where all AS worked together to solve collaboratively problems. The second was innovation in work mode. A work mode from lowlevel to high-level was presented. Resource scheduling for users was firstly taken within their own region. Only when the resources in internal region can not meet user´s requests in the region, was it possible to schedule resources in the backbone one. When user´s resource request could also not be met in the backbone area, AS broadcasted an urgent appeal to the entire grid for resources via an external communication protocol and the AS that could meet the conditions would suddenly respond to the appeal. The third was agent-based system design. Because multi-agent has autonomous, interactive and collaborative features, multi-agent technology was introduced into multi-polar autonomous system grid resource scheduling mode and a detailed design for its implementa- - tion was made. The fourth was that task distribution and scheduling algorithm was improved, a design objective based on the trinity of economic cost, time cost, communication cost was proposed and genetic algorithm was used to optimize globally task assignments. It was believed that multi-polar autonomous system grid resource scheduling model based on multi-agent and genetic algorithm would take possession of intelligent, dynamic self-adaptive and unlimited expanding features, which could be well positioned to meet the new requirements of grid technology development.
