According to the studies conducted on wind erosion in desert regions, the most effective controlling measures can be done in the detachment step. Besides, taking information on relative importance of ablation sources and their role on sediment delivery is a prerequisite for any erosion controlling plans. Recently, fingerprinting based on sediment characteristics, is being increasingly considered as an effective alternative method to determine the main sources of sediment and their relative importance. The main objective of this study is to determine the contribution and relative importance of geomorphological units in the amount of sediment delivered from sand dunes of Maroon-Mollasani area in Khuzestan province. First, the map of geomorphological units was prepared which was classified as the sources of detachment into seven units. Totally, 54 soil samples were taken in the detachment and deposition sites and then the concentration of 47 geochemical elements were measured in each sample. Thereafter, quantitative analysis using X-ray diffraction was conducted on the samples and the percentages of three minerals were determined. Among different elements and minerals, the best combinations with the most discrimination ability were then selected for estimating the contribution of geomorphological units in sediment production using combined multivariate models. Among the selected combinations, Cd-Ge-Mg-Hf-Zn-S-Ga-Ag showed the best detective traces set of geomorphological facies in the map of geomorphological units. The results showed that dry river-eroded piedmont facies (49.79%), marginal wet zone- puffy salt land (25%), clay plain with land use system of rainfed agriculture and bare land(18%), foothill with sheet-rill erosion having rangeland land use (3.71%), clay plain with  land use of rangeland, wet zone facies(3.5%),  and clay plain with land use of rangeland(0%)  have different roles on sediment  production process, respectively. Meanwhile, playa with wet zone facies and clay plain having irrigated farming utilization, clay plain with rangeland land use, foothill with sheet-rill erosion and rangeland land use, dry river- eroded piedmont, marginal wet zone- puffy salt land and clay plain with rainfed agriculture and bare land showed the highest relative importance in sediment production, respectively. Finally, the map of ablation intensity was yielded using the data of relative contribution of each unit in the sediment delivery. 


