Researching of Non-governmental Organizations’ Stability in Rural Regions Case study International Sequestration Project in Southern Khorasan

Mahmoud falsolaiman: Assistant of Professor Geography and rural planning, Geography Department, University of Birjand
Mohammad hajipoor: M. Sc. of Geography and rural planning

Abstract
All over the world and particularly in developing countries, achieving a stable management of natural resources based on local communities' participation via governmental-based methods have been widely effective in countering the environmental destruction and improving the rural subsistence. An appropriate and systematic participation happens when local communities have the right to make decisions or they are to some extent involved in decision making. Sequestration project in Hossein Abad Qeynab Plain was set up to develop the participatory model and mobilizing local communities in this arid and semi-arid ecosystem with the aim of eliminating poverty and improving the Human Development Index (HDI) as well as increasing the carbon dioxide absorption. The goal of this paper is exploring stability of rural development groups established in the area in case official (governmental) systems are omitted. This study is an applied one in objective and deductive-descriptive in content and method. Data were collected using documents and field study. The statistical population of this study consisted of 40 development groups in villages of Hossein Abad Qeynab Plain chosen via two stage cluster sampling method. First, 19 groups were chosen among the whole 40 groups and at the second stage a sample 267 was chosen among the members of each group. The statistical analysis shows that the established development groups gained the necessary stability for pursuing their activities because of factors such as supporting participation, making use of educational courses and the improvement of knowledge level of the people, providing varied employment opportunities, reducing dependence to pastures and finally getting familiar with administrative and banking processes.

Keywords: stable development, mobilizing local communities, people's participation, sequestration project, rural development groups. 

