The objective of this study is to investigate the influence of Gum Arabic-modified magnetic nanoparticles on cellular uptake. The ultimate goal is to develop a technique to promote the selective uptake of magnetic nanoparticles by cancer cells for cancer treatment. A novel use of magnetic fields and magnetic particles is to deliver therapeutic drugs at the desired time in the correct dosage to the correct site in the human body. Other experiments have included using the complex polymer to control nanoparticle size during synthesis as well as growth studies to test whether GA-coated nanoparticles inhibit the proliferation of E. coli. Transmission electron microscopy(TEM) indicate that E. coli sustains growth and interacts with the treated nanoparticles at the membrane, but it is unclear whether there is any internalization. Continued studies include characterizing the surface interactions between GA and magnetic nanoparticles, as well as fundamentally understanding the influence GA-coated nanoparticles have on cellular growth. In order to enhance the utilization of inorganic nanoparticles in biological systems, it is important to develop a fundamental understanding of the influence they have on cellular health and function. Experiments were conducted to test silica, silica/iron oxide, and gold nanoparticles for their affects on the growth and activity of Escherichia coli (E. coli). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and dynamic light scattering (DLS) were used to characterize the morphology and quantify size distribution of the nanoparticles, respectively. TEM was also used to verify the interactions between composite iron oxide nanoparticles and E. coli. The results from DLS indicated that the inorganic nanoparticles formed small aggregates in the growth media. Growth studies were also performed to measure the influence of the nanoparticles on cell proliferation at varying concentrations. The growth curves of E. coli in media containing the nanoparticles indicated no overt signs of toxicity.
