Background and Objective: Creatine and sodium bicarbonate are energizer supplements used by sportsmen to reduce fatigue and increase power output in sprints ? short, strenous excecises ? such as rapid running and explosive movements.The purpose of this study was to compare the effects of creatine monohydrate, sodium bicarbonate and their combined administration on anerobic performance and blood lactate level in wrestlers.
Materials and Methods: A group of  24  national  Iranian junior male wrestlers with a mean age, height, weight and body mass index (BMI) of 17.7±4.76 years, 179.6±7.39cm, 1±9.94 kg and 23.17+1.92 kg/m2, respectively, participated in this this tudy. They all took a placebo for 2 days (20 g maltodextrin/day) and then completed six 10-second Wingate sprints, with a 60-second active rest between each 2. After a lapse of 10 days, the subjects  were randomly assigned, on the basis of base power and body weight, to a creatine (Cr; 20g creatine/day),  sodium bicarbonate (Sb; 0.065 g/kg sodium bicarbonate/day) or creatine-plus-sodium bicarbonate (Cr + Sb; 5g Cr + 0.065 g/kg sodium bicarbonate/day) supplement, using a double-blind design. They took the supplements and the placebo 4 times daily at 9 AM, noon (12’oclock), 6 PM and 10 PM and  drank large amounts of water. In the next phase of the study, 2 days after taking the supplements/placebo, the Wingate tests (six 10-second tests) were repeated and relative peak powers (PP), relative mean power (MP) and fatigue index (FI) were assessed. Blood lactate was measured in a hand-finger blood sample before, immediately and 3 minutes after the last Wingate sprint. The data were analyzed, the statistical tests being  repeated measures,   t-test and ANOVA. An alpha of p?0.05 was used to determine statistical significance.
Results: The data show statistically significant  increases in PP,  MP, and blood lactate level in the  Cr+Sb, Cr and Sb supplement groups as compared to the placebo group (p0?.05). Also blood lactate level and fatigue index immediately and 3 minutes after the last Wingate sprint increased; however, no significant differences were found among Cr+Sb, Cr and Sb groups. 
Conclusion: It can be concluded that short-term consumption of Cr-Sb, Cr or Sb brings about a statistically significant increase to the same extent in both anaerobic power in Wingate 10 s-repeated performances and blood lactate level of wrestlers. 
Keywords: Creatine monohydrate, Sodium bicarbonate, Anaerobic performance, Blood lactate, Wrestler, Wingate

