Introduction: In today's world which is full of competition and technological progress, employees
should be encouraged to improve their skills in order to prevent personal drawbacks and
to survive and promote their organization. Therefore, a plan called "The path for job promotion
among nurses and health care professionals" was approved and executed in hospitals. In the
present study, the relationship between implementation of this plan and hospital performance indicators
was examined.
Methods: The present descriptive-analytical research was implemented in hospitals affiliated to
Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Iran in the summer of 2009. The scores of various titles
and indicators obtained by people liable to the abovementioned plan (approved by the Ministry of
Health, Treatment and Medical Education) in 2008 were calculated and their relationship with
hospital performance indicators (percentage of occupied beds, average hospital stay of the patients
and bed rotation) in the same year was evaluated. To analyze the data, Kendal correlation
coefficient was used in SPSS11.
Results: The plan consists of three general titles including factors related to personal skills and
abilities (training courses, education, experience and responsibility), factors related to the individual's
performance (clients' satisfaction, quality of services, establishment of health principles,
presenting recommendations, and training colleagues), and other factors (presenting books and
articles, researches, services in rural areas, encouragement and appreciation). Among these titles
and indicators, there were only significant relationships only between clients' satisfaction and the
percentage of occupied beds (P = 0.02), establishment of health principles and bed rotation (P =
0.04), services in rural areas and the percentage of occupied beds (P = 0.01) as well as average
hospital stay of the patients (P = 0.02).
Conclusion: Based on our results, the plan could not achieve its main objective, i.e. improving
individual and thus organizational performance. Therefore, its design and execution need to be
reviewed and evaluated again. It is recommended to provide scores based on valid principles and
documents. In addition, to promote competitiveness, 65% of the scores should be allocated to
nurses and other health positions that gained higher scores.
Keywords: Performance; Hospitals; Medicine.
