Background and Objective: No information is available on the consumption of creatine supplements in Iran. Creatine supplements are very popular among athletes. The annual sales only in USA in 2001 were reported to exceed $400 million. ٌConsidering the claims of creatine ethyl ester (CEE) manufacturers and distributers about its effects on muscle tissue and strength compared to other creatine forms (specially creatine monohydrate), this investigation was initiated  to determine the effects of dietary supplementation of CEE on muscle strength and body composition in underweight non-athlete males. 
Materials and Methods: This was a double-blind placebo-controlled study. Sixteen underweight non-athlete volunteers were randomly assigned to either a CEE group (CEE, n=8) or a placebo group (PL, n=8). In the CEE group, the supplements were orally ingested at a dose of approximately 20 g/day for the first 5 days (the loading phase), followed by ingestion of approximately 5 g/day for 37 days (the maintenance phase). Subjects in the PL group took rice-flour capsules instead of CEE. Body weight, fat-free mass, and fat mass, as well as muscular strength (bench press and leg press) of the subjects, were measured at the beginning and at the end of a training period of 6 weeks, 3 sessions per week. The independent t-test was used for statistical analysis.
Results: Results showed that the CEE group demonstrated greater improvements in 1 Repetition Maximum (1RM) of bench press (12.5 vs. 7.5 kg) and leg press(8.12 vs. 5 kg) than the PL group, although the differences were not statistically significant. Also, body weight (1.69 vs. 0.5 kg) and aft-free mass increased to a greater extent, and fat mass decreased, in the CEE compared to the PL group, but in this case the differences did not reach statistical significance either. Finally, no significant changes were observed in thigh (1 vs 0.63 cm) or upper arm (0.63 vs. 0.48 cm) circumference or body mass index in either group. 
Conclusion: It is concluded that CEE supplementation is not necessarily effective as regards increasing muscle mass and strength or improving body composition in underweight non-athlete males.
Keywords: Creatine ethyl ester, Fat-free mass, Muscular strength, Underweight

