Background and Objective: Most of the information on the adverse health effects of trans fats has been mainly obtained from studies done in western populations; very little information is available in this area  from the Middle-East. The objective of this study was to determine the association between consumption of partially hydrogenated vegetable oils (PHVOs) and non-HVOs and circulating levels of inflammatory markers among Tehrani female-teachers 40-60 years old.
Materials and Methods: Usual dietary intakes of 486 apparently healthy women were assessed using a semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaire. The vegetable oils consumed were catagorized into PHVOs (commonly used for cooking in Iran) and  non-HVOs (sunflower, corn, canola, soybeanm., and olive oils)  Anthropometric measurements were made and fasting blood samples were taken for measuring inflammatory markers.
Results: The energy-adjusted daily intakes of PHVOs and non-HVOs were 23±11 and 22±10 g/d, respectively. After controlling for potential confounders, the plasma levels of CRP, TNF-?,  IL-6, and  soluble intercellular adhesion molecules (sICAM-1) of the women in the top quintile of PHVOs intake (as compared to the lowest quintile) were 45% (Ptrend <  0.01), 66% (Ptrend <  0.1), 72% (Ptrend <  0.05), and 22%( Ptrend < 0.01),  respectively. In contrast, a higher consumption of non-HVOs was associated with lower circulating levels of CRP (-23%, Ptrend=0.05), TNF-? (-29%, Ptrend < 0.01), SAA (-24%, Ptrend < 0.01), and soluble intercellular adhesion molecule ICAM-1 (-19%, Ptrend < 0.05) when the top intake quantile was compared with the lowest . Adjustment for body mass index, fasting plasma glucose, and lipid profile slightly attenuated the associations in some cases.
Conclusion: Higher intakes of PHVOs are associated with elevated levels of inflammatory biomarkers, while higher intakes of non-HVOs are associated with lower plasma levels of these biomarkers in  female-teachers.
Keywords: Partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, Inflammation, Trans fatty acids, Cardiovascular disease, Women

