Background and Objectives:  Early child nutrition plays a vital role in the growth and development not only in infancy but also later in life. This study was carried out to determine the views, beliefs and experience of mothers, caregivers and health professionals about the role of socio-economic and cultural factors in child feeding practices in Damavand, a district located in the north of Tehran, in 2008.
Subject and Methods: In a qualitative study 23 focus group discussions (FGDs) were held with the presence of a facilitator, 2 rapporteurs, and a supervisor. Mothers of under-2-year-old children attended 11 FGDs, and 8 FGDs were arranged for home caregivers (grandmothers), out-of-home care-givers (community child health nurses), and rural and urban health workers. At the end of the field work all the notes taken in the FGDs were coded based on objectives of the study. Then the subgroups for each objective and emerging themes were derived and reported. The data were analyzed using content analysis.
Results: Most participants were aware of breast feeding and complementary feeding benefits. However, exclusive breast feeding was not followed precisely and the quality and diversity of the diet of children were ignored. The participants thought that social and economic factors, such as literacy, income, erroneous beliefs, family restrictions, and interference of elderly females, had a role in failure of breast and complementary feeding. Cultural factors appeared to have an important influence on mothers’ infant feeding practices and feeding patterns of their children.
Conclusion: To overcome the problems related to breast feeding and complementary feeding practices, revision of the current nutritional protocols and educational programs is essential. In addition, involvement of mothers, caregivers, elderly women, and all those involved in child care, in nutrition education activities is recommended. 
Keywords: Nutrition, Infant, Economic factors, Qualitative research

