Sustainable development is one of the main priorities of EU energy policy, together with reduction of Europe\´s dependence on external supplies and integration the community\´s individual national energy markets. The commission\´s overall environmental policy is set out in "the Fifth Environmental Action Programme", it is underpinned by two major principles: 1) the environmental dimension must be integrated into all major policy areas. 2) the command-and-control approach must be replaced with a sharing of responsibility between the various parties involved - governments, industry and the public. European legislation has been setting environmental standards across the continent since the early 1970s. This is achieved by creating a single market in environmentally friendly products and processes and thus stimulating their emergence. Over 200 pieces of legislation have been formulated in various sectors. In fact the planning of "environmental power systems" is undoubtedly influenced by the legislative activities and market policies. The aim of this paper is a review of green power marketing activity in European countries, to gain additional perspective on key factors or policies that affect the development of green power markets. Specifically we explore which particular product designs, market structures, incentive programs, marketing strategies or other factors lead to more robust green power markets. Therefore, it achieve an additional review on the politics that several European countries have adopted relatively to green power market and also on the importance that the laws cover on the ordering of the locals agencies, on the discipline of the environment assets and the private and public regulations. All that connecting to the social and environmental policies. The objective is to determine the possibility to define coherent national legislations with those communitarian ones, in such way to guarantee a criteria of selection of the utility respected politics of a green power markets. Finally it is opportune an evaluation of the quality of energy related to the environment.
