In India and other countries, the situation of the small landholders is becoming worse day by day. Overall they contribute more than 50% of the crop that is eaten in the world but still they are not rising. SIMPLIFIED E-FARMING SUPPORT will help them make better use of their land and get better production and profit. Its main motive is to reach out to farmers and disseminating relevant and timely information to them. The objective is to simply bring to small farmers the integration of politics, technology and capital. In this proposed research work, API´s of FAO are made to interact with the algorithm that runs for efficient and useful data that is to be provided to the illiterate farmers, in a manner that they can understand it. Information in regional language, weather forecast, GPS enabled device provided to the small farmers with audio and visual support. As the farmer enables the device, it will show a very simplified result according to the type of his query. The application system provides client users with all the information that is relevant for his land, search function, on-line crop management, statistical summaries of profit that they can make by growing a particular crop on their land, statistical summary about their land, the recommendations that FAO makes to increase productivity not by much use of &#8220;Water&#8221; but rather much use of &#8220;Fertilizers&#8221;. The system facilitates efficient management of land, monitoring it and providing data by using GPS and Web approaches. The interface of the device will be more of &#8220;picture based&#8221; rather than &#8220;text based&#8221; that will make even the illiterate farmers understand it and use it. The project focuses mainly the small landholders who can really bring miracles if they are given certain guidelines about the proper management of their land and information about the crops best suited for their land. The project focuses not only providing a free callback service- for the small farmers but also certain videos and audios will be provided so they can visualize how things need to be performed on land. Video conferencing is the most important aspect of this as farmer can query via video conference and show if he is facing any problem with crop and land. For example, how to use a particular pesticide, how to seed the land for better output and so on.
