Introduction & Objective: The present study evaluated staining as a result of the chlorhexidine use and the role of sodium perborate in removing stains; in addition, the amount of decreases in plaque and gingival inflammation and the role of sodium perborate in chlorhexidine efficacy in removing plaque and decreasing gingival inflammation were evaluated. 
Materials & Methods: In the present randomized clinical trial 40 patients (20-30 years old) referring to the Department of Periodontics, who had mild-to-moderate gingivitis were randomly divided into two groups with a parallel study design and were evaluated in a double-blind scheme. At baseline the patients underwent scaling, root planning and polishing procedures and brushed their teeth daily for two weeks. After two weeks, plaque indexes (PI), gingival indexes (GI) and bleeding indexes (BI) were determined and recorded. In the control group 0.2% chlorhexidine gluconate mouthwash and in the experimental group 0.2% chlorhexidine gluconate mouthwash containing 0.2% sodium perborate were used for 30 seconds. The subjects refrained from tooth brushing during this period. After 14 days the above-mentioned indexes were again determined and recorded, along with staining indexes.Also staining potential of mouthwash and chlorhexidine mouthwash containing sodium perborate was analysed with spectrophotometric devices. Data was analyzed by t-test. 
Results: There were no statistically significant differences in PI, BI and GI between the control and experimental groups, although there were more decreases in PI, GI and BI in the experimental group compared to the control group. Regarding the intensity of staining, there was a significant decrease in the intensity and extent of staining on tooth surfaces and gingivitis in the experimental group compared to the control group (P=0.001). 
Conclusion: The use of chlorhexidine mouthwash containing sodium perborate significantly decreases the amount and extent of stains but has no inhibitory effect on chlorhexidine potential to reduce plaque and gingivitis.
