99Conceptual Verification of Nature and human being relation Regarding to Eschatology in Holy Quran
Abstract
Conceptual Verification of Nature and human being regarding Eschatology in Holy Quran
DR. Mohamad Reza Bemanian, Elham Saleh
1- Associate Professor, Faculty of Art and Architecture,Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran.
2- Master of Architecture,Faculty of Art and Architecture,Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran.
Interdisciplinary Quranic Studies journal of
Iranian Students, Quranic Organization
2012;61-70
Accepted for publication: 20 February 2012Vol.2,No.2, July-december,2012
Objective(s): Subject of recognition of nature, principles and laws dominated on it and using these principles in human activities and making artificial environment are the main goals of this research .This important method is derived from the thought that, human being as the successor of the God on the earth knows that , normally he should create his/her works with benefiting of principles and characteristics dominated on divine creatures .
Methods: This article is based on Islamic worldview. From an Islamic worldview point, type of understanding and thinking method that Islamic thinking presents about existence, is substructure and backrest of functions between human beings and nature. Research method in this article is descriptive – Analytic based on Quran, religious and Islamic resources studies, and documents related to this research. And we try to step in library type studies path in direction of goals of this research.
Conclusion: Generality of resurrection is as a divine system which dominates on the world. Divine
matured wisdom, has designed an available and visible system which dominates on. Based on this fact, the system which dominates on the world of existence has three spaces that are : divine system , nature system and human–being system. Nature system is in line of divine system. and fate of human system should be in direction of divine willpower. Whereas all systems of nature are stable. Then, from eschatology point of view, five main systems are: moving, balance, opposition, perfection and creation are verified.
Key words: Resurrection, Holy Quran, System, Nature, Human.
*Corresponding Author: Faculty of Arts and Arehitecture - Tarbiat Modarres university Tehran Tel:021-88008090
