Introduction: One of the most important functions of nurses is preserving lives of clients in emergency cases, thus it is necessary that nurses be aware of triage procedure, so that upon which they can provide quick and correct nursing interventions to those injured by on time identification of needs in critical conditions. 
Objective: This study aims to determine the effect of triage education on knowledge, attitude and practice on nurses employed in Poursina Educational and Therapeutic Emergency center in Rasht.  
Methods: This is a semi-experimental study and data gathering tool included questionnaire (consisted of three sections of personal characteristics, determination of knowledge and attitude) and check list to assess practice.  Content validity was used to determine the tool validity. Test- retest, Cronbach Alpha, inter-rater methods and simultaneous observation of two observers were used to determine scientific reliability of questionnaire and checklist respectively. Questionnaire and check list were completed by emergency nurses and researcher before instruction and two weeks after last instructional session respectively. Instructional program was presented in group by lecture and discussion method using instructional booklet and complementary equipments in three sessions each lasting for 60 minutes. Samples were selected by method of sampling based on target and 40 nurses employed in emergency center were selected. Ultimately, data analysis was performed using descriptive and analytical statistics by SPSS version 16.
Results: Average score of triage knowledge from 16.25 before instruction to 30.75 after instruction, average score of triage attitude from 126.75 before instruction to 154.95 after instruction, and average score of triage performance from 39.77 before instruction  to 55.85 after instruction were significantly increased (P=0.0001). Other results showed a significant relation between marital status work shift and mean average of score progression in knowledge domain (P <  0.05).
Conclusion: Findings showed that triage instruction was effective on rate of knowledge, attitude and practice of nurses employed in emergency wards. In attention to study results and importance of triage, development of theoretical and practical instruction periods is recommended for nursing personnel. 

