Introduction: Stress is referred to the cumulative physical and somatic reactions that can disturb equilibrium of individuals. Entrance  to  university  is  a  period  that  is  very  crucial in living of active and skilled forces in every country which accompanies changes with interpersonal and social relationship. A number of students adapt themselves with new condition and accept changes with flexibility and maintain mental health and achieve educational success. But some others are not able to adapt properly and this mal adaptation has negative effect on individual’s function and outcome. One’s reaction to stressors depends mainly on cultural, religious, social and past experiences. 
Objective: This study aims to determine the effect of religious beliefs in stress reduction in students of Langroud Faculty of Medical Sciences.
Methods: This is a correlational descriptive study. Samples included first year students residing in dormitories and all second term students in nursing, laboratory and radiology technicians (60 students). Data collection instrument included two questionnaires of Santa Clara which assessed religious beliefs and Storch Stress test and they were self reported. 
Results: The results showed that 87.9% of students had high level of beliefs. Also results showed that 56.3% of students had moderate stress. Results indicated a significant relationship between religious beliefs and level of stress when examined by chi-square (x2=9.38). Results showed no significant relationship between age, marital status, economic status and stress and religious beliefs. Also no significant relation was reported between study majors and stress and religious beliefs.  
Conclusion: The results  which indicated the existence of a positive  relation  between  level  of  stress  and  religious beliefs can serve a guidance for education planning as more emphasis be paid in student courses regarding the importance of religious beliefs and its role in decreasing stress.

