Introduction: Since hospital is responsible for patients’ health referring to them, and the quality of hospital services is evaluated according to patients’ needs and satisfaction, evaluation according to patients’ point of views and their satisfaction of the hospital services has become more and more popular due to hospital competition for more patient receptions.  It can be said that one of the intricate difficulties due to lack of patients’ satisfaction is discharge by own desire consequently, this will cause stagnation and unsuitable financial conditions and loses which can not be compensated.   
Objective: This study aims to determine effective factors on patient discharge with own agreement.
Methods: This is a cross sectional study conducted in fall of 2009 in order to survey causes of patient discharge with their own desire in Ghazvin Shahid Rajaei. The study sample consisted of all 330 patients who were released upon their own desire. A check list was used to gather data and SPSS software and descriptive statistical methods were used for data analysis. 
Results: Among all hospital wards, C.C.U. with 59.3 percent and Emergency with 23.3 percent had the highest discharge with own desire. Twelve percent of the patients declared that they had a relatively complete recovery in time of releasing from hospital. The discharge with own agreement of most patients (76%) was in evening or night. From the viewpoint of the patients, the most important reasons in the matter of releasing with their own desire are as follows: Lack of satisfaction with hospital services (33%) Doctors’ purpose (27.5%) Lack of satisfaction with hospital equipments (12.7%) 
Conclusion: Results indicated most important reasons are prioritized as lack of satisfaction with the doctor, doctors referring patients to private sectors and lack of proper equipments in the hospital. It can be said that the hospital managers’ effort to obtain patients satisfaction, can provide the bases for rising the standards and qualities of hospital services and with the accompanying therapeutic personnel improve the quality of the services.

