In many area of Iran, the reproductive growth of oilseed crops is exposed to drought stress. Our objective was to examine the effect of water stress during growth stages of canola on yield, yield components, seed oil and protein contents. This study was conducted with field and pot experiments at Azad university of Shuoshter during 2009-10. The field experiment design was split plots arranged in randomized complete block design with four replications. Moderate and severe water stresses with no water stress treatments as main plot and Hyola -308, Sarigol and Heros cultivars as sud-plot tested in field experiment. In a pot experiment, Hyola 308, Sarigol and Heros cultivars were planted in eight treatments including short and long periods of water stress in growth stages, with 3 replications. Treatments were eight levels of water stress (no water stress, stress in stem elongation, anthesis , pod growth, grain filling , stem elongation to end of growth , early of anthesis until end of growth and early pod growth to end of growth). Field experiment result showed that maximum grain yield (3961.5 kg/ha) and minimum of yield (1731.1 kg/ha) was obtained for Hyola 308 and Heros cultivars respectively. Among yield components, number of siliques per plant was the most sensitive component to water stress. Heros cultivar with control treatment had the highest seed number per siliques (114.23) but with moderate and severe water stress, seed number decreased. High seed number per siliques and 1000-seed weight caused to increase grain yield in Hyola 308. In pot experiment, the greatest seed yield reduction was observed when water stress occurred at flowering (30.3%) and then at silique development (20.7%). Seed yield reduction by short – term water stresses in stem elongation, flowering and silique development were mostly associated with the reduction of silique number per plant. The reduction of seed yield by short–term water stress during seed development was due to reduction of seed weight. 
