Problem-Based Learning (PBL) is a pedagogical strategy for posing significant, contextualized, real world situations, and providing resources, guidance, and instruction to learners as they develop content knowledge and problem solving skills. PBL has been used since the 1950´ s. Students take responsibility for their own learning as PBL encourages students to identify their learning needs and determine the resources they will need to use to accomplish their tasks. While it originated in universities, it is now also employed in businesses and classrooms. PBL also encourages collaborative and cooperative learning among students and their peers; students play the key role in encouraging learning in this collaborative setting. The objective is to conduct a research which is the best assessment technique for HCI subject either; 1)self assessment, 2)peer assessment or 3)group assessment in PBL application to assist UTeM students in answering PBL questions. This study is also to adopt an assessment technique as a testing tool for PBL application where lecturers are involved in evaluation before the final prototype is developed. Sample of students are second year of Faculty of Information and Communication Technology students in Interactive Media course pursuing Bachelor in Computer Science at Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka (UTeM). The course is held in the second semester of the second year of the Computer Science programme. The topic chosen is User Interface Design. Three types of assessment techniques are highlighted in PBL. There are self, peer and group assessment. Methods conducted are questionnaire, interview and observation. Problem-based Learning, curriculum design, the role of the tutor and various other aspects, much less attention has been given to the purposes and principles of assessment in PBL . A pre and post test questionnaire will be distributed to the students before and after the exposure respectively. The final product will be released in the form- of PBL web based.
