Notice of Retraction<br/><br/>After careful and considered review of the content of this paper by a duly constituted expert committee, this paper has been found to be in violation of IEEE´s Publication Principles.<br/><br/>We hereby retract the content of this paper. Reasonable effort should be made to remove all past references to this paper.<br/><br/>The presenting author of this paper has the option to appeal this decision by contacting TPII@ieee.org.<br/><br/>It is still the greatest hot issue about efficiency on learning. This study is part of a broader research approach concerning the investigation of students´ opinions and aims to study adult distance education students´ perspective on critical success factors of e-learning. Based on a comprehensive study by Selim (2007) grouped ?critical success factor? into four categories: (1) instructor, (2) student, (3) information technology, and (4) university support. The participants are selected from National Open University (NOU) in Taiwan. The NOU is not only the first school to implement distance education in Taiwan, but also the students are all adult. During seminar training be teach by technology, learning and instruction. The distance education implement by teaching of TV and broadcast early, developed by way of video on demand (VOD) later. In a few of research about e-learning, especially study on critical success factors of e-learning, this study tries to discuss students´ perspective. This study has two main objectives. The first one is to analysis the difference in aspects of students´ perspective on critical success factors of different personal backgrounds. The second objective is to comparative the results of Selim´s research in 2007. In order to generalize the data with demographic and focus on calculation, to discuss the differences between ?instructor?, ?student?, ?information technology?, and ?university support? is investigated by a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and multivariate analysis of - ariance (MANOVA). The research result includes: (1) Students´ perspective of distance education on critical success factors of e-learning are good instructor and good Web site. (2) Both of them have to be usefully and friendly. (3) Students in distance education need more efficiency on e-learning. (4) The Web site should be easily, clearly, sufficiently, and pleasantly. We expect more research to investigate the thoughts of students and teachers about cri- ical success factors of e-learning in the future.
