RAWRA, as a Czech state organisation, is responsible for the process of selection of a suitable site for the disposal of nuclear waste. The Czech Republic has a total of six reactors at two nuclear power plants. Most of the Czech Republic´s spent nuclear fuel is produced by these reactors and it is essential that a suitable area be located for its long-term disposal. In addition, the Czech Republic also has a number of research reactors but they produce a relatively small amount of spent fuel in comparison with industrial reactors. The site selected for the disposal of spent nuclear fuel must be located in a geologically stable area and, importantly, this essentially state project must have the support of local inhabitants. Issues concerning the suitability of the geological structure of selected areas, the design of the spent nuclear fuel canisters and the creation of an overall deep geological repository concept are the responsibility of RAWRA´s DGR department. This department, together with RAWRA´s communications (PR) department, is responsible for securing the support of the residents of the various municipalities concerned for the conducting of detailed geological research with regard to the location of the DGR and the potential construction of such a nuclear facility in the future. The main objective of the PR department is to determine a communications approach that will allow for the provision of clear and comprehensive information to the general public on the geological exploration work required for the siting of a DGR, its impact on the surrounding environment and the overall deep geological repository concept in the Czech Republic. The Czech Republic plans a single-floor deep geological repository at an estimated depth of 500 meters in a granite or gneissic rock mass located in a non-seismically active area. The presentation will summarise the current situation with regard to spent nuclear fuel in the Czech Republic and outline both progress to date i- terms of the geological exploration of candidate sites for the location of a DGR and the communication strategy employed by RAWRA in order to harness the support of the general public for the DGR project.
