Housekeeping is one of the low cost or no cost for energy conservation opportunities measures which can be defined as an excellent starting point for improving the methodology of operation. Maintenance program include simple, practical and common sense measures. These measures can be taken to save energy, reduce the cost of production and at the same time minimize the losses of raw materials, minimize waste, conserve water and mitigate environmental impact. Implementation of these practices is relatively easy and fast and the cost is usually low. Thus, these practices are practically suitable for operation managers to integrate into the daily program to define objective, select measures to improve, set priorities for action and delegate responsibilities. Housekeeping measures were discussed and applied in El-Nasr Weaving, Spinning and Knitting Company. Our main objective is to reduce energy consumption by using waste heat in two locations, named boiler house and dyeing &amp; finishing department. Improvement suggestions resulting from analysis were addressed through the action plan, also the impact of energy measures on general cost, environment and organization were discussed according to priority of each gain. Cost and saving ware calculated according to information gathered and data obtained. Percentage of annual energy saving was 5.65% which can be translated to money saving of about 75,000 L.E yearly for one boiler and about 200,000 L.E yearly for the whole system. Savings could be achieved through the implementation of simple housekeeping measures. Some of total saving involves no cost to implement. Based on this initial success, it is suggested to reinvest a portion of the energy cost saving achieved in purchasing some simple portable instrumentation to assist carrying out a detailed energy survey of this company. In addition, regular training program for personnel responsible for operating major energy consuming equipment should be done to maintain awarenes s of energy efficiency. Also, a program of energy conservation awareness must be followed to raise energy efficiency. Also, a program of energy conservation suggestions monthly has to be applied to encourage the employee to make new suggestions for improving energy efficiency.
