Introduction & Objective: Several studies have been performed to evaluate correlation of serum high sensitivity  CRP level with the prognosis of  the patients with diagnosis of  unstable  angina , and by now different results were reported. The aim of this study was to assess correlation between serum high sensitive CRP level and inhospital prognosis and cardiac events in the patients with unstable angina. 
Materials & Methods: This descriptive analytic study was performed between Sep 2004 till Feb 2006 in Shahid Beheshti hospital . kermanshah ,Iran . 250 patients were collected for high sensitive CRP measurement . Exclusion criteria were: acute ST elevation MI, Non ST elevation MI, patients with history of recent infection , patients with recent trauma and patients  with serum high sensitive CRP level more than 10 mg/lit . patients were divided to two groups. First group whose serum high sensitive CRP level was less than 3 mg/lit and second group whose serum high sensitive CRP level was between 3 and 10 mg/lit . They were followed for recurrent chest pain , arrhythmias , pulmonary edema, acute  myocardial infarction and in hospital death . Results were analyzed with x² and t-test . 
Results: Mean age were 57± 7.8 and 58 ±11.5 years in first group and second group respectively. There was statistically significant difference in some cardiac complications such as dyspnea, duration of hospitalization, recurrent chest pain ,ccu  admittion (P.value < 0.001) and in hospital myocardial infarction (P.value=0.03), between two groups. Some complications did not have significant difference such as pulmonary edema , cardiogenic shock , arrhythmia , S3,S4 and pulmonary rales .There was no mortality in  both groups. 
Conclusion: According to the results , we can use serum high sensitive CRP level for risk stratification in the patients with diagnosis of unstable angina . obviously the patients with high serum h.s. CRP level need more attention whether  early invasive management help these patients , may be the matter of later studies.
