The objective of this research project was to study the relationship between leadership styles of directors with organizational health in highschools of the lendjan township. Due to the nature of the subject, the present research in descriptive and of correlation type. Statistical population is composed of all the high school teachers of the lendjam township in the number of 1645 in the scholar year 2008-2009 who were selected via random sampling of classed appropriate to volume and employing the sample volume for mula through whom, 190 individuals were selected. To collect data, two questionnaires of the director's leadership style and the orgamization health were used. The verified questionnaire of the director's leadership style with 53 close questions with 5- degree likret spectoum was employed the Haus' theory of direction of targets. Also the organizational health questionnaire comprising of 44 questions of closed answers was adapted from the organizational health questionnaire of hoi et al. Mean while validity of the questionnaires was confirmed by some of the educational management experts of the Isfahan University. Reliability of the questionnaires was computed through the Cronbach alpha coefficient according to which reliability of the questionnaire of leadership style was estimated to be 91% and that of the organizational health was 94%. Data analysis was performed at the two descriptire statistics (frequency, percentage, mean and stamdard deviation) and at the inference statistics (pearson's correlation coefficient, multiple regression and the variance analysis test) using the SPSS software. The research findings showed that there is a signiticamt and direct relationship setween the leadership styles (success- oreiented, conductive, supportive, cooperative) and the orgamizational health. There was no significant difference between opinions of the highschool teachers on leadership styles of the school principals based on demographic specifications (gender, educational degree, career past record). Also, data indicated that there was no difference betveen opinions of teachers on organizational health according to educational degree and career past record howerer, there was a difference based on gender. Based on results of multiple regression, amongst the triad styles, the supportive and conductive styles were predictive of organizational health.
