Background: Septic arthritis is one of the most common causes of joint destruction.
Objective: The aim of this study was to assess management of definitive or suspected cases of
septic arthritis in educational hospitals of Qazvin University of Medical Sciences within 2003 to
2008.
Methods: This was an observational study performed based on existing data. The medical files of
patients with arthritis in three hospitals were assessed. Patients were hospitalized in orthopedic,
rheumatology and pediatrics wards. Intravenous antibiotic receivers for arthritis (more than three
days) were analyzed (174 cases) and all necessary information was collected. Data were analyzed
by SPSS software using descriptive statistics.
Finding: Of total study population, 57.5% of cases were males, 70.6% under the age 12 years, and
85.2% with mono-articular involvement. The most common joint involved was knee in adults
(39.6%) and hip in children (47.2%). Trauma was the most common predisposing factor (73%)
whereas limitation in movement found to be the most frequent (85.6%) clinical manifestation at the
time of admission. Only 57 patients underwent arthrocenthesis and positive culture results were
found in 8 cases. Essential considerations such as smear, gram staining and assessing the presence
of crystals in synovial fluid were not accomplished to an acceptable level yet the less important
criteria such as lactate dehydrogenase, protein, and glucose concentrations of synovial fluid were
tested for majority of patients. Antibiotic regimen composed of an anti-staphylococcal agent in most
cases. Within the first four hours following admission, 54.6% of cases received intravenous
antibiotics and 24.7% of cases received IV antibiotic therapy for longer than two weeks.
Conclusion: According to inappropriate management of patients with definite and suspected septic
arthritis, attempts should be made to consider parameters such as careful history and physical
examination, correct duration of antibiotic therapy, and the process of determining the type of
microorganisms causeing septic arthritis including smear and culture of synovial fluid as well as
taking necessary measures to improve the current conditions.
