Introduction & Objective: Puberty is a critical stage through which the foundation of an individuals adult life is estabilished. Menstruation disorder are very common is this stage. Lake of sight affects the release of LH & FSH hormones. Therefore, blindness can have some effects on puberty, fertility and menstruation processes in girls. The present research was done with the aim of investigation some of the menstruation disorders at the onset of puberty in blind girls in 2009.
Materials & Methods: This study is peripheral and descriptive. The research samples were 72 sightless girls. Sampling was done using census method after enlightening the units under study. Data collecting instrument consisted of a questionnaire including demographic and menstrual features and linear-visual analog which were undertaken by a trained interviewer. The collected information was analyzed using spss by variance analysis tests and Pearson correlation coefficient and p <  0/05 proved meaningful.
Results: From a total of 72 samples,70 were analyzed and examined. The girls average age was 13.1 0.8 and menarche average age was 11.7 1.4.The prevalence of menstruation disorders was estimated as 58.55%.The highest and lowest frequencies were,respetively oligomenorrhea(19.9%) and amenorrhea(1.4%). 8.1% of them had referred to medical centers for examination.82.2% of the blind girls suffered from menstrual pain, before and during the menstrual period. In investigating the relationship between the onset of menstruation and BMI,a meaningful statistical relation was observed(p < 0.02).A meaningful statistical relation was noticed among the emergence of menstrual disorder,BMI,exercise, menarche age and menstrual pain. There was no significant statistical relation between the parent's literacy level, economic status and the menstrual disorder.
Conclusion: Finding showed that menstrual disorders have high prevalence among blind girls, nevertheless, few of them referred to clinical centers for an examination.Additionally, due to the low age of menarche, these girls encounter different type of menstrual disorders sooner than normal girls do.Hence, it is essential to give the relevant necessary trainings and insights concerning these issues, to the girls themselves, their mothers and teachers. 

