Introduction & Objective: Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is one of the occupational hazard threats in young active people who employ in medical professions. In order to planning an effective program to reduce risk of AIDS in this group; providing accurate information about their knowledge and attitude towards AIDS is essential. The purpose of this study was to determine HIV/AIDS related  knowledge and attitude of  nurses and health care workers  in the greatest educational hospital in Shiraz- south of IRAN.
Materials & Methods: This was a cross-sectional descriptive-analytic study. Target groups were nurses and healthcare workers of Namazi hospital in Shiraz in 1388.The participants were selected with random sampling method including 178 nurses and 75 healthcare workers. Data gathering tool was a questionnaire with 30 questions related to knowledge and 15 questions related to attitude. The data was analyzed through SPSS software .Statistical methods such as one way ANOVA, spearman correlation and T-Test were used for analyzing data.
Results: Findings showed the majority of subjects were female (86.5%), 54.4% were married and 34.5% were permanent staff. The most of nurses and healthcare workers had an intermediate knowledge about AIDS (62.9% and 65.9% respectively). More than half of cases had a week attitude towards AIDS (55.9% of nurses and 57.7% of health care workers). There was a significant relationship between attitude and knowledge level of nurses with their information recourses (P=0.025 & P=0.004). A correlation between different hospital wards and nurses attitude was observed (P=0.025). Also there was a significant relationship between knowledge and attitude of nurses (P=0.001) and knowledge and attitude of health care workers. (P=0.001).
Conclusion: It seems focus on routine educational program and lack of update teaching caused intermediate knowledge, therefore anew formative planning should be considered for CME program , also more cultural and educational activities are essential to decrease stigmatization and discrimination against AIDS and improve their attitudes. 

