Background: In addition to effects of biological factors and physical risks on incidence and exacerbation of gastrointestinal ulcers, the coping strategies and attitudes are also considered as psychologically important factors affecting the creation and exacerbation of this disease as well as the disease-associated stress.
Objective: The aim of this study was to compare the dysfunctional attitudes and types of coping styles of patients with peptic ulcers with those of healthy control group.
Methods: This was a case control study carried out on all patients with gastrointestinal ulcers who were referred to three hospitals (Mostafa Khomeini, Imam Khomeini, and Dr Shariati) in Tehran during February-June 2010. Study population was consisted case (100 patients) and control (100 healthy relatives of patients and hospital staff) groups. Two groups were matched regarding the age, sex, educational level, and marital status. The research tools were three questionnaires on demographic characteristics, dysfunctional attitudes scale, and a list of coping styles questions. Data were analyzed by independent T and chi-square tests and logistic regression analysis.
Findings: There were significant differences in dysfunctional attitude variables, problem- and emotion-oriented coping styles between two groups (P < 0.05). Moreover, patients in case group showed higher levels of dysfunctional attitudes and emotion-oriented coping styles whereas in control group the coping styles were mostly problem-oriented. Dysfunctional attitude had the highest share in explaining the peptic ulcer disease followed by problem- and emotion-oriented coping styles, respectively. 
Conclusion: According to the findings obtained in the present study, it seems that the people’s attitude towards themselves and the environment affects the creation and perception of stress. Thus, providing the patients with psychological interventions could lead to more favorable results when treating gastrointestinal ulcers.

