Introduction & Objective: Surgical infection that caused by every surgery is one of nosocomial infection. Hand disinfection or scrub is an effective method to prevent this infection. There are many antiseptic solutions that used for hand scrubbing. For accessing to the most quality of hand scrubbing, it is necessary this procedure be according to correct principle or standard. Therefore this survey was conducted in order to determine of rate performance of surgical hand scrub standard in Hamadan educational hospitals.   
Materials & Methods: in this descriptive study, population and sample were all surgeons and operating room nurses of Hamadan educational hospitals. Data collection tools were 4 check lists about process of hand surgical protocol with alcohol-based and non alcoholic hand antiseptic solutions, instruments of these protocols. In order to gathering data, each sample was observed 3 times when he or she was accomplished hand scrub. 
Results: The average score of surgical hand scrub process with alcoholic solutions was 67.6% of total score. Mean score of scrub instruments with alcohol base solutions was 100% and about non alcoholic solutions was %90.3 of total score of its instruments of essential and important points in hand antisepsis process with both solutions that was report in least performance, were to washing hands with water and soap before scrub and after removal of sterile gloves, to disinfect all parts of hand and to clean under nails. Time of scrub was 108 seconds and with alcoholic solutions and 215.6 seconds with nonalcoholic solutions. Differences between antisepsis duration in according to hospital and kind of surgery were significant (p < 0.001). Difference between alcohol –base solutions scrub process with hospital under surgery and kin of surgery, was reported significant (p < 0.001). Difference between nonalcoholic solutions and kind of surgery, was reported significant too( p < 0.001).
Conclusion: for correct performance of hand scrub, it is required: 1- infection committee or nursing supervisor office of hospitals, determine hand scrub standards according to latest scientific changes for implementation. 2- Personnel education and equipments were provided to do this procedure correctly according to surgical hand scrub protocol . 3- Surveillances for correct performance were done continuously. 

