Abstract:
Introduction: this age is based on education and research, but librarians have the main role for teaching to the users. Librarians, themselves should have enough information literacy and skills in order to move information to users and give convenience information services to their users’ library. The objective of this research is the survey study of information literacy among librarians at the university libraries.
Methods: this research is a descriptive and applied study. The data were gathered from 100 librarians at Center University libraries: beheshti. Tehran, tarbiyat modarres, medical university of iran and shahid beheshti by questionnaire and present refer. Questionnaire included 31 close questions and used SPSS for giving average and analytical columns.
Results: The research shows that the most using are from online database58%.internet69% and computer catalog71%. Librarians at tarbiyat modares with 3.62 average have the best skills in using the materials and librarians at medical university of shahid beheshti were very low in skills. Following resources have great average of using between librarians: Persian book (3.82) and database (3.56). The best way in order to take information about libraries field was using internet (80%). Lake of knowledge about new references64% and to be familiar with English language 52% and computers50% were the main inhibitor for information resources. Library prepared short periods of professional’s education. Training during their jobs are good for increase information literacy. 92% of librarians believe that giving professional information and training during their jobs are necessary for university librarians.
Conclusion: Research finding indicated that librarian’s information literacy level in Center University libraries aren’t good and the level is middle. Therefore it was recommended that  training during their jobs, ICDL classes, to be familiar with English languag and information literacy lesson at university.  
 

