Background and Objective: Nowadays, establishment of “urban order and
peacefulness” in societies is associated with some complexities in a way that at
present utilization of traditional policing approaches do not lead to significant
effectiveness and efficiency. In this regard, based on systemic thought, policing
approach should be changed from “threat –orientation” to “community –orientation”
to enable police forces to design and establish a more sustainable
“ urban order and peacefulness”. The present study is aimed at identifying,
defining and designing a series of “quantitative variables providing feedback”
to assess and evaluate the effectiveness level of modern community- oriented
policing.
Research Method: The present research has been conducted based on survey analytical
method in the city of Tehran. (N=662) and is comprised of people
in reputable universities, those selling clothes, intelligence and security police,
cinema house, press house, hospitals and health care and medical centers. The
research has been conducted through using two-stage cluster sampling. The
required information and data collected through library studies, conducting
either remote or face to face interviews and distributing questionnaires among
respondents. Chronbach’s Alpha coefficient is used in the research in order to
test the validity of the tool, and based on this for each cluster a certain Alpha
is calculated. Among the 6 achieved Alphas, the maximum and the minimum
sums have been 0.721 and 0.852. The content reliability of the test has been
evaluated through getting the views of the relevant experts and specialists, as
well as theoretical literature and the existing relevant theories.
Findings: The present research has identified, defined and designed a series
theoretical researches and through collecting the experts, scholars and specialists’
views, the variables and effective security threats identified .Afterward,
through disseminating 130 questionnaires among respondents and collecting
data and using factor analysis and using SPSS, the research identifies the security
threats impacting tourists’ impression and their travel to Iran. The research
information collected in September 2011.Sample tourists were selected among
those staying in foreign tourists’ centers in different cities: Tehran, Share Ray,
Isfahan, Shiraz and Kashan. The questionnaires have been completed by tourists
who stayed in Iran at least for 3 days. The final results achieved from factor
analysis led to identification and prioritizing 7 factors such as religious limitations,
vehicles’ accidents, social insecurity, etc.

