Objective:The current study examines the rate of library anxiety among students of Islamic Azad University, North Tehran Branch, in academic year 2010–2011 and the ways to reduce it.
Methodology:The research method was a descriptive survey. In order to examine library anxiety,Bostick’s Library Anxiety Scale was used, and to examine the research variables, inferential statistics was used. Leven test was used for variance equations, while T-test was used to compare the averages of two independent variables, and ANOVA test was used for the equality of average of one variable in several independent groups. After sampling with simple random method from among 4589 freshmen, the researchers selected 345 male and female students in graduate and undergraduate program.
Findings: The findings of reviewing gender differences showed that library anxiety was more prevalent among women than among men, which were 2.996 and 2.8116 respectively; however, in terms of age and level of familiarity with computer, they had the same level of anxiety. Also, educational level (graduate or undergraduate) had no effect on library anxiety. However, there could be seen more anxiety in closed shelf than in open library systems (2.9892 and 2.8580 respectively) and more anxiety in index card than in computerized systems (3.0049 and 2.8114 respectively). The highest average of anxiety was found in Technical-Engineering College and Chemistry College, while the lowest level of anxiety was found in Humanities College and Marine Techniques and Sciences College. Students’ membership in a library before entering university did not have any effect on their library anxiety. 
Conclusion: Based on the research findings and the library anxiety score (defined in this study), it was found that among the freshmen students of Islamic Azad University, North Tehran Branch, who entered university in the academic year 2010–2011 in both graduate and undergraduate program, the library anxiety was at the intermediate level.

