ABSTRACT: The tourism industry plays an important role in the economy and cultural interactions of the nations. Aim of Study: The prime objective of this research was to investigate the viewpoint of the sport and tourism experts in regard with the factors affecting the development of the sport tourism in Khuzestan Province. 
Material and Methods: In this analytical descriptive study which was conducted through the field study, the statistical population consisted of the staff of the physical education and tourism organizations (121 and 72 subjects from each field, respectively). The statistical sample included 92 sport and 59 tourism experts who were randomly selected. The data were collected using a researcher-made questionnaire designed in two different parts. The first part dealt with the personal characteristics of the subjects, while the second part investigated the factors affecting the development of the sport tourism consisted of 40 questions with 5 value Likert scale (including push factors, attracting factors, and deterrent factors). The validity of the questionnaire was studied through the factor analysis (0.702), while its reliability was calculated using the alpha-cronbach method (?=0.81). Descriptive and inferential statistics (Friedman test) was applied to fulfill the data analysis. 
Results: The findings of the research indicated that the order of the factors affecting the development of the sport tourism is as following: attracting factors with a mean of 2.94, deterrent factors with a mean of 1.81, and the push factors with a mean equal to 1.25. Furthermore, amongst the subscales of the attracting factors “the quality of the accommodation facilities” with a mean of 13.19; amongst the subscales of the deterrent factors “warmth and unpleasant climate” with a mean of 10.69; and amongst the subscales of the push factors “tranquility and relaxation” with a mean equal to 9.89 were ranked as the most important sub-factors impacting the sport tourism in the region. Conclusions: Considering the results of the current study, it is strongly recommended that the sport and tourism authorities attempt to develop the push factors, eliminate the deterrent factors, and reinforce the attracting factors to further develop the sport tourism industry in Khuzestan province.

