Using proper methods in designing buildings being compatible with the climatic conditions of a region has always been important for architects. It has been common in Iran for a long time to consider natural and inexhaustible energies such as the sun, wind and to improve the thermal conditions in inhabited areas. Using these energies in buildings leads to saving energy, and significantly improves the comfort level and sanitary conditions in inhabited areas. To control the inside space of a building, the first step in using natural energies is to adapt the building and the environment in general to the climatic conditions of that place. By examining rural buildings in the contemporary period, many cases were found in which their plan or the established buildings undergone different kinds of inappropriateness in their organs, functional elements and the quality of building process. The problems reveal their self more in operation which are the lack of attention to ultimate goals and saving rurals of energy consumption and lack of adoption with natural condition which greatly affect the welfare level and satisfaction rate in thermal conditions of houses for their residents. So far the compatibility of buildings' faceless in different geographical directions with climatic conditions has not been studied in respect of measuring that how it affects energy consumption levels and expenditure; Therefore, researchers examined energy consumption level, expenditure, and the level of satisfaction with temperature inside the building and their relation with the geographical directions of buildings’ facades. To conduct this study, three methods have been used; documentary resources, fieldworks by using  questionnaire. SPSS has been used to analyze the data. The findings show a significant difference between the buildings’ facades and the level of energy consumption. Buildings with northern façade had the most levels of the following objective factors: energy consumption, hours the heating and cooling systems being on and the whole consumption expenditure of families. On the contrary, buildings with southern facades had the least levels of the above mentioned factors.  In addition, the level of satisfaction with the heating and cooling systems inside the buildings during hot and cold seasons as subjective factors were studied. Families whose buildings had southern facades had the most level of satisfaction. But families whose buildings had northern facades had the least level of satisfaction. Results showed that for saving in fossilized fuels in cold and hot season, buildings which had southern facades provided the best atmosphere in the building. On the contray, buildings which had northern facades provided the worst condition. Therefore, lack of attention to natural conditons of the area results in an increase in expenditures and the lake of thermal welfare for the residents. Finally the paper recomend that there are two ways by which unnessary consumption of energies can be avoided: appropriate facading of houses (according to the angle of sun radiation and the direction of wind) using local experiences of every region in the building of rural houses.
