The main objective of this paper is to reach a more or less clear image and perception of principles and rules of indigenous urban planning and design. On the one hand, Isfahan School in urban planning has been introduced, explained and extended as a symbol of indigenous urban planning and design owing to the clear and precise explanation of its content in the history of Iran's architecture and urbanism; and on the other hand, two movements of "New Urbanism" and "Urban Village" have been reviewed as an emblem of contemporary urban theories that originated from the concept of the sustainability. In each part, besides reviewing some of the most important references related to our subject, it is endeavored to represent, and if necessary, to compare a list of the most salient doctrines and principles of every school in a table form. In the final part, through a confrontation between doctrines extracted from Isfahan School in urban planning (indigenous doctrine) and distinguishing features of New Urbanism and Urban Village (universal characteristics), similarities and dissimilarities of them have been analyzed. Based on such comparison, proposed doctrines of this paper entitled as principles and rules of indigenous urban planning and design have been represented in the form of twenty subjects.
Research findings reveal that there are few differences and a great deal of proximity between features of Isfahan School in urban planning and principles and rules of contemporary urban theories. In fact, the analytical comparison mostly shows the same tendency and scarcely discrepancies and lack of harmony between them. Albeit some of contrasts are seen in relation with subjects including "mode of transportation", "journey time", "compactness" and etc, taking a close look, indicates that roots of such contrasts is associated with lack of the simultaneity of them. In simple word, these contrasting examples have never been a serious concern in Isfahan School in urban planning due to circumstances of that period, that is, conditions of Iran in Safaviyeh era. In contrary, emerging a large quantity of proximity between contemporary urban theories and Isfahan School in urban planning indicates this fact that the essence of the sustainability is derived from the characteristics of traditional cities. These similarities are a pleasant context to extract principles and rules of indigenous urban planning and design; principles that revert to the inside and have signs of doctrines of Isfahan School in urban planning on the one hand, and look to outside and express signals of distinguishing features and components of contemporary urban theories on the other hand. 

