The present research considers the role of play statement in Children and Teenagers Theater, with a special approach to drama-therapy. Chapter one studies the theater history to the present time; then explains the play statements' elements. Since the Children and Teenagers Theater has specific addressees, it may be considered in many respects. Chapter two has been devoted to recognition of this age-group's characteristics. Chapter three views the Children and Teenagers Theater as its main subject; also it provides the history of Children and Teenagers Theater, concepts, characteristics, methods, structure and pathology. Chapter four focuses on drama-therapy which is some kind of art-therapy, its formation process, definitions, elements and pattern. Also the factors of play statement in Children and Teenagers Theater have been studied from the view point of the drama-therapy. Since the researcher assumes this kind of treatment as the most effective way of overcoming the children and teens' problems and difficulties, in this chapter you may find out some play techniques in drama-therapy of the children and teens. Among the conducted studies concerning to appropriate behavior toward children and teenagers’ activities, who have some special emotional and behavioral problems, dramatic methods have drawn attention of researchers as a necessity for correction of behavior in rehabilitation centers, schools for exceptional children, foundling hospitals, and house of corrections for delinquent children and teenagers. Given those problems, one may find that no one can come to the satisfactory results only by training some words or by speech. Thus, a kind of technique should be taken that not only to overcome elimination of improper performances in this age group, but also to lead to more favorable and sustainable learning techniques among them. One of such points is adaption of a technique that is followed by repetition and exercise. In this regard, employing dramatic strategies may be one of the effective techniques. Thus, drama (exhibitive technique) may permanently play role in treatment and enhancement of children and teenagers’ abilities and for optimization of children’s behavior. The main objective of the present study is to examine effectiveness of dramatic speech elements as drama-therapy for children and teenagers. With respect to this fact that the conducted studies in Iran have paid no attention to this field so the researcher tends to know if dramatic elements have any positive impacts on process of application of drama by therapeutic approach toward children and teenagers or not. The central question of the research is about the effect of the statement factors in Children and Teenagers Theater, upon which we based the assumption of efficiency of the play factors in this kind of theater and with therapy approach. Also it is a basis for concluding that the play elements have a crucial role in Children and Teenagers Drama Therapy. This treatment is considered as an appropriate method for curing this age-group. So the researcher offers some suggestions about the applying this method in Iran relying on the effect of the play elements. 
