In this research was developed the methodology useful for the future Caspian Sea coastal management what is nowadays inevitable for Azerbaijan to support decision makers in their everyday activities related with the sustainable development of coastal zones. As the material for the research were selected the reliable data sources as high-resolution satellite imagery which can be compared with the aerial photography which was always suitable for the purposes of the coastal management. The high-resolution satellite imagery satisfied the needs of coastal environmental management giving almost the same results as aerial photography. The satellite images were obtained with the coverage of pilot territories of Gizil-Agach strict nature reserve and sanctuary located along Caspian Sea coastal line. The main objective of this research was to present the up-to-date developed method of how to predict the Caspian Sea level fluctuation impacts on the coastal areas by monitoring visually results of geographical information system processing analysis based on the accurate spatial data acquired from high-resolution stereo satellite imagery. Besides nowadays acquisition of satellite imagery is easily accessible periodically what gives possibility for the permanent tracking of coastal line change dynamics. Using the advantages of high-resolution satellite imagery it is possible to extract majority of all relief topographical details along the coastal areas and over whole pilot territory using stereo plotting techniques what is very important for the further GIS modeling of Caspian Sea possible level fluctuation impacts to coastal areas. In comparison with the already implemented works in this field, the main advantage of this research is the creation of the high- accurate digital terrain model what gives us possibility for the interpolation through the defined interval and based on this principle modeling of the potential water flood and drop areas on the different levels of Caspian S- ea. The results of this research presented that the processing of high-resolution stereo satellite imagery and preparation of precise stereo model, digital terrain models and digital orthophoto maps and further GIS processing of these accurate material sources are absolutely suitable methodology for the environmental modeling of potential Caspian Sea water level fluctuations. It means that it is possible to transform this photogrammetric methodology and GIS techniques into the integrated technological form that can be used by the decision makers and all other parties involved in the activities related with the Caspian Sea coastal management.
