Abstract 
 empowerment  mechanism  for  achievement  to  participative  management  and  the  cause  of  human  potential  removal , job  satisfaction  is  result  of  personnel  understanding  ratio  to  work  content , job  satisfaction  is  effective  and  efficiency  factor  to  organization  and  organizational  commitment  is  attitude  to  personnel  loyalty  to  organization  that  increases  organizational decision by  personnel  partnership. Present  research is aiming  at  relationship  between  variables  and  as  a  guidance  for  organization  for  increasing  empowerment , job  satisfaction  and  organizational  commitment  and  decreasing  job stress. Inspite  of  relationship  study  between  variables , if talks  about  relationship  study  between  charactristic of demografik  factoriery ( age , gendre , educational  level ) by  four  study  main  variables. This  research  explains  correlation  according  to  practical  objective  and  the  way  of  collecting  information. Population  personnel  head  office  in  Petropars  company  are 480 that  choase  270 by using of sample quantity setting formula. Collecting  information  and the way  of  random  sampling is used  by  answering sheet. In  this  research  you  will  find  information  analysis  test , one  sample T- test , sign  test , Friedman  ANOVA  and  Pearson correlation  coefficient. Then  it  talks  about  guesstimates  study  after  doing  factor  analysis  variables  and  find  their  parameters  by  using  of  degree  average  to  priority  of  their  parameters  and  variables .According  to the  results  of  this  research  by guesstimates , there  is significance  relationship  between  empowerment  and  organizational  commitment  , job satisfaction and organizational commitment , job stress and organizational commitment , empowerment and job satisfaction, job satisfaction and job stress and between  empowerment  and  job  stress . The  result  of  study  charactristic  of  demografik  factoriery  ( age , gendre , educational level) with research variables. There is significance relationship between  empowerment  and  organizational  commitment  with  educational  level  and  between  job  satisfaction  and  job  stress  with  age  of  people . 

