Objective: The present study was conducted to evaluate the antibacterial activity of Miswak extracts on periodontal pathogenic bacteria. Materials and Methods: Miswak sticks were grounded to fine powder and then ethanol and aqueous extraction were formulated. Chlorhexidine (Oradex) mouth wash used as positive control and sterilized distal water used as negative control. Dental biofilm bacteria investigated including Eikenella corrodens, Streptococcus constellatus, Streptococcus sanguis, and Streptococcus salivariu. All bacteria cultured in Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) agar. Single pure colonies of bacteria were transferred into fresh BHI broth and incubated overnight. Bacterial counting was done by using Colony Forming Unit (CFU). Antibacterial activities were determined using bacteria grown on Mueller Hinton II agar by Minimum Inhibition Concentration (MIC) test and Minimum Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) test. Bacterial morphological alterations following treatment with Miswak extracts, Oradex and distilled water investigated under Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) at 3500x, 10000x and 20000x magnifications. Results: MIC tests showed that Miswak ethanol extract mouthwash only require 25%w/v to inhibit growth of a fixed amount (0.2ml) of bacteria S.constellatus, S.salivarius and E.corrodens while S. mutans and S.sanguis only require 15% w/v Miswak ethanol extract to inhibit its growth, while aqueous extract at 50% w/v concentration did not inhibit any bacterial growth. MBC results revealed that 50% w/v ethanol Miswak extract mouthwash inhibited 100% of bacteria growth. However, 50% w/v aqueous Miswak extract mouthwash inhibited 20&#8211;60% of the bacterial growth. Under SEM ethanolic extract of Miswak and Oradex produced obvious alterations to the bacterial morphology while no changes were observed after treatment with aqueous Miswak extract. Conclusion: Miswak ethanol extract has stronger antibacterial action against periodontal pathogenic bacteria, it can be p- - roposed as a good alternative mouthwash to control and inhibit periodontal pathogenic bacteria.
