
Abstract: As far as the quantitative amount of publications is concerned, the social science in Iran is accused of negligence and that it is not in line with the rapid rate of production and publication in science. The main issue of the present essay is to determine the extent of truthfulness of this accusation concerning the social science production status in Iran, given the impartial and objective data. 
Taking the literature of sociology of science, the act of publication, on the one hand enriches different capital reserves, and it is, on the other hand, an instrument for competitive struggle and for demonstrating scientific competence in the world of science. This process is a part of awarding system in the scientific community. Among scientists, it is also a medium for scientific interaction, representing norms for the socially inclined scientists.
Most importantly, quantity and quality of scientific publications show the development of science in every branch or field of human sciences. Since science is metaphorically a live organism, and that ،life of science' is in many ways similar to that of the natural life, the theory of ،ecology of science' can offer potent concepts and metaphors for researchers in order to describe and develop science.
Utilizing this approach and by use of the method known as ،scientometrics' this paper seeks to recognize evolutionary points in production of science in the field of social sciences in the decade of 2000-2010.
The findings of this study show the main model of production of science in the field of social sciences in Iran has been that of ،book production' In the last decade, 80 per cent of science production belongs to human sciences, and 14.9 percent to social sciences. Regarding the amount of science production, social sciences take the third place after the fields of literature and religion. It indicates the ،principle of diversity' in ecology of science that means the production process and ecology of social sciences is based on the pattern of books not the ISI articles. This pattern is however, different in some fields such as chemistry. The results show that in the decade under study, the quantitative development of social sciences production accompanies the quantitative development of other sciences. It demonstrates the ،co-evolutionary' phenomenon in ecology of science.
As to the other findings, they show that the current situation and the evolutionary trend of this decade, when variables such as translation or authorship, originating in Tehran or other cities, being male or female, first print or reprint and other quantitative indexes of publication like circulation, pages, and the like are considered in the social science texts,.
Key Concepts: Social Sciences; Iran, Scientometrics; Ecology of Science; Science Production; Production and Publication of Books; Social Aspects of Science Production.

