Introduction: Zinc is one of main micronutrient for human. Its deficiency may cause retarded growth, short stature, and delayed maturity. Zinc deficiency can increase chance of diarrhea and pneumonia. Borderline zinc deficiency is a common nutritional problem worldwide, specially in children of developing countries. Objective of this study was to determine the effect of zinc sulfate supplement on growth of 6-24 months old infants in Bushehr.
Methods: In a random experiment, 241 infants from 6 to 24 months old who reported for treatments to city health and medical center were selected as the subjects for this study. The criteria for selection was that these children did not suffer from organic disease. These children were randomly divided into study and control groups. The study group received daily dose of 5 cc liquid zinc sulfate containing 5 mg zinc elemental for six months in addition to ferrous sulfate drops and multi vitamins. The control group received only ferrous sulfate drops and multi vitamins. Weights at birth of all children in two groups were recorded. These children’s weight and height were measured and recorded every month during the experiment and three months after its completion. They were also tested for digestive and respiratory diseases.
Results: Findings showed that mean of weight of experiment group increased of (8.62?1.16) in first month to (11.26?1.4) in eights month, that in comparison with month to month, increase in weight was significantly (P < 0.005). In respect to the height, the increases in experiment group were significantly higher in the first, fourth, seventh, eights month compared to the control group. However, when we compared the differences in weights and heights in consecutive months, the weight difference was significantly higher in the Sixth and eights month (P < 0.04). There was no significant difference in height during the study period (P > 0.05). Incidences of gastroenteritis and pneumonia were significantly lower in experiment group compared to the control group (P < 0.05).
Conclusion: The results of study showed that mean weight of children who used zinc sulfate was significantly higher than the control group. However, there was no significant difference in heights between the two groups. So it is recommended to add Zinc supplement to children's food regimen specially those have stopped or slowed growth rate and also in children with recurrent infections.

