Experiences of regional planning in recent decades and its inflexibility have led to the change of regional planning from forecasting-base to scenario-base planning approach. On the scenario-base approach, instead of employing all factors, key and drive development factors are identified such that the framework of flexible planning and policy making are designed through managing of probable future scenarios.
The objective of this paper is to use a scenario-base planning technique in East Azarbaijan province.
The paper utilized a survey method by using a cross-impact matrix model. Data of the research were collected through questionnaire and Delphi method. In the first stage, in cooperation with experts, the factors affecting the provincial development were recognized, and in the second stage, the matrices of expert-recognized were completed and analyzed.
To gain the goals, the direct and indirect analyses were utilized. In order to implement the research, the data of some 76 factors were collected by 10 different socio-economic groups in East Azarbaijan and analyzed by using MICMAC Software. Meanwhile, 13 key and drive factors were identified. The results showed that about 76.5 % of the matrix cells were full of data, indicating that a majority of factors had effects on each other. Out of the 4415 appraisal relations, some 1361 relations (24%) were null and did not affect each other.
The research findings showed that, in East Azarbaijan province, the socio-economic system is unstable. In addition, factors of a) management system, b) research and development, c) high technology, d) Aras Free Zone, and e) water resources are key factors for the provincial future development. On the other hand, such factors as human development, social cohesion, ecological equilibrium, consumption pattern, environment, and national linkages are outputs that are extracted from the system and affected by other factors. In fact, these factors are the outcome of policies and implementation of plans but they do not influence other factors perse. 

Keywords: Development, Development drives, East Azarbaijan Province, Key factors, Scenario.

