Introduction: Foot drop is a common and distressing problem that can lead to falls and injury. Considering the respective Patients and physicians’ concerns regarding the prognosis of this condition, relative improvement in some cases and no complete study about this problem in our country despite various treatments attempted, a closer study to assess prognosis in these patients seems necessary.
Objective: The aim of this study is to investigate the associated factors in foot drop improvement including age, gender, site, cause and type of injury, time between the incidence and referral, and type of treatment.
Materials and Methods: The present study is a cross- sectional one carried out with the patients referred to electordiagnosis department of Pursina hospital of Rasht in 2010-11. After entering the patient into study, demographic information, cause and damage started time were recorded. All the patients after a complete neurological examination were assessed by a neurologist experienced in EMG-NCV. Afterwards, the vulnerable patients were treated routinely. No intervention was done in the process of treatment and recorded the type of treatment. Patients had monthly visits, with improvement and changes in treatment recorded. If a patient withdrew he was excluded. Six months later, based on the age, gender, site, cause and type of injury time between the incidence and referral and type of treatment, all the patients were compared in terms of recovery.
Results: Totally, 105 patients (61 males and 44 females) with mean age of 45±17.3 years participated in this study. 56.2% of them were cured. The improvement in the root was (44.1%), sciatic nerve (75%), common peroneal nerve (75%), deep peroneal nerve (88.9%), which was statistically significant (P <  0.005). The recovery rate of axonal lesion (53.5%) and   Demyelinating lesion (100%) which were statistically significant (P < 0.028). The recovery rate of foot drop in trauma was (75.6%), radiculopathy (38.6%) and local compression was (85.7%) which was also statistically significant (P < 0.0001). The recovery rate of foot drop according to type of treatment was not statistically significant in 95% of improved patients, the average age was 35-43 years (P < 0.0001) and time between the incidence and referral in 95% of improved patient, were within 0.8 to 2 months, which   was statistically significant (P < 0.0001)
Conclusion: Predictive factors of recovery were age of the patient and time between the incidence and referral.

