Introduction: ADHD is a common disorder in children and adolescents. The children and adolescents with ADHD are at a high risk for cigarette smoking and substance abuse. Studies show earlier age of the onset of cigarette smoking in these groups of children and adolescents.
Objective: This study was performed to determine the attitude towards cigarette smoking in attention deficit- hyperactive children from 7 to 12 years of age compared to that among their normal siblings and control group.
Materials and Methods: This was a comparative cross sectional study performed on three groups of 7 to 12 years old children. The first group was the patients referred to Shafa Hospital with the diagnosis of ADHD based on clinical interview of child and adolescent psychiatrist and semi-structured K- SADS (Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for school age children) interview. The second group was siblings of the first group and the third group was the patients referred to dentistry clinic of Guilan University, that were not ADHD by clinical interview and K- SADS. Attitude toward cigarette smoking and demographic data also were gathered by another questionnaire.
Result: Our study shows negative attitude of ADHD group towards cigarette smoking and there was no difference between different groups, and between boys and girls. But there was a negative correlation between age and attitude toward cigarette smoking (r= -0.618). There was a significant difference between ADHD group’s attitude towards smoking as a relaxing act and other groups.
Conclusion: Negative attitude toward cigarette smoking in the above-mentioned groups shows that the age of changing attitude toward cigarette smoking in the adolescents would be higher. The attitude of  being relaxed by cigarette smoking in ADHD adolescents show motor and mind restlessness, which is so important that treatment is essential. The results of this study could be a preliminary step for performing more studies to determine target groups for preventive education of adolescents about cigarette smoking.


