Background: Inulin has been increasingly used due to its beneficial nutritional attributes as prebiotic ingredient and nutritional values. The burdock tuberous could be a source of inulin. Now a day's Ultrasound has attracted considerable interest in food science and technology due to its promising effects in food processing and preservation. The ultrasonically induced cavitations were shown to increase the permeability of the plant tissues. The mechanical effects of ultrasound provide a greater penetration of solvent into cellular materials. In some cases direct sonication increased the efficiency of extraction at lower temperatures and shorter time. 
Objective: Optimization of extraction conditions for burdock tubers using sonication.
Methods: In this research, a series of statistically designed studies such as central composite design (CCD) and response surface methodology (RSM) were performed to investigate the effect of each of the independent variables, ultrasonic waves (20-100%), exposure time (5-25 min) & treatment temperature (20-60 °C) on yield of inulin extraction from burdock tubers. Response surface methodology was employed to optimize multiple variables to predict the best performance conditions with a minimum number of experiments. According to Determination of inulin content of extraction liquid, Total carbohydrate and Reducing sugar were determined and finally the inulin content was measured with the difference between total carbohydrate and reducing sugars. Inulin extraction yield (%) was calculated using the following relationship = (inulin content × volume of extraction liquid/mass of Burdock tuber powder) ×100.
Results: Based on canonical analysis, the optimal conditions for maximizing inulin extraction yield (24.36%) were at 36.85 °C for 25.4 min and amplitude of 83.2%.
Conclusions: application of ultrasound would be a promising method to enhance the extraction process.
Keywords: Inulin, Extraction, Burdock tuberous, Ultrasonic technique

