Relevant with some important subjects like target recognition, sensor fusion systems can be considered as one of the main issues highlighting here. Environmental condition, target characteristic and sensor efficiency are three parameters which can impress on sensor value in target recognition so for recognizing targets, a group of sensors which have more recognition rates, must be selected intelligently. Utilizing many sensors to acquire the highest object recognition rate would have extra cost and decrease energy of mobile sensors rapidly. Therefore make a tradeoff between sensor numbers and object recognition rate would be imperatively. This paper attempts to design a multi objective optimization service by using optimization algorithm and neural network. This service specifies highest recognition rate for each distinct sensor numbers. We propose multi objective optimization algorithm to help accessing the best sensory configuration for a definite environment regarding to the environmental conditions, sensors performance, and object features. Our multi objective optimization algorithm has two functions. Genetic algorithm is used to perform as one of functions to specify object recognition rates of each sensor group. Neural network is used to perform as fitness function of each genetic algorithm chromosomes. Another function is sensor numbers determinant. Highest recognition rate and lowest sensor numbers are two objects which multi objective optimization algorithm wants to make a balance between them. We define 500 different scenarios for 6 different sensors in different conditions. Object recognition rate of each sensor is collected. These rates are used for neural networks training process. By defining new scenario and run multi objective optimization algorithm in this scenario, this algorithm makes a Pareto front between sensor numbers and object recognition rate. Finally this algorithm finds, by distinct numbers of sensor, which sensors by which recognition ab- - ility must be used to reach the highest recognition rate.
