How could human being have language? This is the main objective of this talk. This is a part of long-term objective - making the concept of intelligence clearer. It is difficult to define intelligence because it implies a philosophical aspect. But to analyze its functional aspect is useful for its understanding.There is a close relation between intelligence and knowledge. Knowledge is well defined until it is coped with by computers today. It is a concept represented explicitly by language and what is useful in human everyday life is knowledge. If Intelligence is defined based on knowledge, then it can be well understood. Thus, intelligence is related with language via knowledge. Roles of language are representation of things and its processing. Its function is smooth communication and problem solving arising in everyday life. Deductive inference embodied to language plays an important role. It generates knowledge in the same level as existing knowledge and expands the scope of available knowledge. For example, given knowledge such as ´Person is mortal´and´Boy is person´, ´Boy Is Mortal´ that was previously unknown, is deduced. But deductive inference itself is not intelligence because its procedure is formalized in language. On the other hand, if new knowledge that has not been included in the existing knowledge nor in its expansion by inference is added, then the scope of knowledge expands considerably by the combination with the existing knowledge. In particular if this new knowledge is in higher level than any existing one, this effect is much larger. This is the function of intelligence. Thus intelligence is defined as a function to create and upgrades knowledge. Here language plays an important role. Language is a complex and difficult entity and has been made researches by number of researchers in the different areas. In particular it has been an important research object by many eminent philosophers such as, G. W. Leibniz, W. von Humboldt, E. G. A. Hus- - serl, F. L. G Frege, F. de Saussure, B. A. W. Russell, L. J. J. Wittgenstein, etc. They analyzed already existing language. But, who did make such a complex entity as language? It is sure that human being had no language at outset of history of evolution but had it at some point in it. Did human being create language? How? After language was created, it helped human being to enhance intelligence. Before that time however there was no big difference between human being and the other animals and intelligence level of human being was very low. Then, how could human being create such complex entity as language with such limited intelligence? It seems a big mystery. In this talk it is attempted to resolve this problem. It is to make a model of language being made by biological processing mechanism in living thing. Neural network as biological processing mechanism of living things was made mainly to maintain their lives in the evolutional process. Processing by neural network is very different from language processing. But it is shown that under a special condition it behaves like language processor and also that birth and growth of neuron enabled primitive human being to have primitive language. Furthermore additional change of living environment such as community life let it grow to the higher level language. These things are discussed in this talk.
