Bernard Lassus’s theory has been started with the research of readability, light, color and form, and has been ended to the Garden topic as Landscape perspective. He considers landscape as an unlimited and understandable horizon through the look; Horizon which motivates practical training of place organizing by considering the unlimited imagination. There is a complicated relationship between object (essence) and landscape. General use of the "Landscape" word and continuous research to define it, show the relation and link difficulty between objects. Considering this relationship in the landscaping method, depends on a momentary look which covers only some part of the visible space of the visual aspect. So the landscape is an imaginary look, at our surrounding places and environment. Bernard Lassus’s method in his all projects is to organize places by considering the boundary between reality and appearance. He has his own method which predicts landscape exactly with the tools. This article tries to investigate his theoretical process.
The relationship between light, color, and visual and tactile feelings is the considerable subject here. The desirable terms, main and classic perceptions of landscape are light, color, visibility and imagination. Lassus’s researches were started about the color and appearance relationship since 1950, and he was always thinking of these concepts. The landscape and the color are extremely linked to each other. The "Visual aspect" theory is presented which depend on the experiences and researches of the difference between being visible and physical reality, by Bernard Lassus. Environment, is composed of a spatial, Visual, unique and full of objective frame and a whole was made by getting together, and they become worthy by communicating each other, not by getting together. Every object has a particular place than the other objects in this unique landscape. Bernard Lassus’s researches are started from the object surrounding frames which dynamically interact with the environment and are ended to landscape understanding. This research depends on the Series of processes which are ended to the basic concepts by considering the object and its position in the environment.
The appearance, finds its growing in the gap of reality and appearance by "revolutionary" evidences. We don’t need the physical conversion to change a landscape, and only the minimal intervention is enough. Lassus uses the visual techniques which include two scales: residents scale and landscape scale, the two different perception and landscape. "Landscape residents" is an unknown inspiring footprint in Lassus’s researches. Research which looks for visual mechanisms understanding of a landscape’s general aesthetic. Bernard Lassus’s "Landscape residents" are the simple ones who change their life and home environment-no matter how small it is -. These residents create different scales of miniaturized Garden- Landscape through their imagination. Each of the creativity represents dreamy and non functional space. Only the one who dreams, would be able to understand vertical imagination: That’s the Garden.
Bernard Lassus thought about imaginary gardens since 1961. He represented the new perspective of dramatic- ethnographical- anthropological of the landscape which was founded in the Infinite area (immeasurable area) on that time. Claude Lévi-Strauss considers the landscape residents as a new field between dramatic- ethnographical- anthropological researches and Studies. Lassus represents a landscaping method in which location and the creative mind (subject) are intimately linked. This process doesn’t create an object, but creates landscaping relationships; So that “the aesthetics as a landscape making method” which has root in place and basis in imaginary, is expressed.  Lassus called landscaping as a conversion and motility art of the path, due to its Impressionable. This probably should be the clearest lessons of Bernard Lassus.
Only the landscape democratic method can recognize the location and residents participation in selecting interventions, and can give landscape the value. Discovering the places shows the cultural diversity, belonging and acceptance. These are the parts of path which makes life easier and more enjoyable for all near and far residents, and goes towards variety with all its contradictions and diversity, the enjoyable path for looking and spirit, a new garden for our world, open path, as a landscape totality. The modern path that discovers places depths, and the architect as an exhibitor, will create landscape method. 

