In this paper the concept of “Creative City” is introduced as an innovative and progressive paradigm towards urban management to solve numerous and varied complex and interrelated challenges of contemporary urban context. Based on many profound and radical changes of the urban environment, creative city is defined as a strategic approach in speculating, rethinking, planning and implementing urban plans and projects as well as policies and programs. It influences many aspects of the civic life including the social, cultural, economic, financial and business dimensions. Urban creativity tries to integrate ideas of a wide array of interests and encourages public participation of all stakeholders including citizens, owners of businesses, planners and designers in addition to managers. In order to accomplish this goal, a shift of perspective through with the city is looked at is mandatory; from a rigid bureaucratic process towards a dynamic and flexible procedure for urban policies, plans and projects. 
Creative city can have great influences on urban planning and management and the whole city in a broader sense. It can bring new latent and unforeseen opportunities to the urban environment. Creative solutions and innovative strategies to overcome the challenges of cities appear to become attainable by making best of the available physical and intellectual recourses that the cities possess. 
The quality of life within the cities and the urban livability is directly related to the success of urban planning and management. As a revealing and representing example, “City of Melbourne” is considered as one of the world’s most livable cities and the quality of life in this city is located among the highest in worldwide rankings. In order to maintain its position and improve its performance, the City of Melbourne has established goals, objectives and indicators to measure the effectiveness of the activities related to urban planning and management. The eight goals of urban management in Melbourne include; city for people, a creative city, economic prosperity, a knowledge city, an eco-city, a connected city, lead by example and manage the resources well. Each of these goals is defined and the objectives and indicators are presented in this paper. Under the theme of “Creative City and Urban Management”, the goal of creative city in Melbourne is elaborated in the light of livability and quality of life concepts. The future plans for Melbourne have identified creativity as one of city’s major strengths and try to build up on this as a great opportunity for the citizens. Consistent with the City of Melbourne’s objective of creating an inclusive environment that encourages participation of all citizens and stakeholders, the urban management has revised its strategies and aims to encourage a vibrant, creative community and sets out a vision for nurturing and enhancing the quality of life and level of livability within Melbourne Central Business District and Metropolitan Melbourne inner and outer suburbs.
In addition to presenting case specific progressive urban strategies and solutions, the results of the case study of Melbourne can be utilized by urban planners and managers in other cities as a successful example in terms of targeting goals and establishment of objectives and indictors in urban management performance.

