Introduction: Medical records consist of documents evidencing a patient's health status at a
moment of life. There is a close relationship between disease progress and daily physician orders
issued in medical records. Each order in fact reflects the patient's medical status and his/her
disease progress. In this study, while keeping the previous progress page in the records, a column
of brief disease progress was included in physician order sheets to increase the quality of records
and promote the education of learners.
Methods: In this cross-sectional controlled interventional study, medical records of all patients
admitted to super specialty wards of Amirkola Children Hospital during the first quarters of 2009
and 2010 were included. From a total of 3462 records, 150 records were studied each year. Each
indicator of disease progress, which was recorded based on subjective, objective, assessment, and
plan (SOAP) note, was given a score. Finally, if only three indicators were mentioned in the
record, it was considered as poor. Scores 4-5 represented moderate and scores 6-7 were
considered as good. The scores of the records were then compared using statistical tests including
t-test, paired t-test, Pearson's correlation coefficient, chi-square test, Fisher's exact test, and
Kappa coefficient. P values less than 0.05 were considered as significant.
Results: The mean number of physician orders in records during the first quarters of 2009 and
2010 were respectively 9.15 ± 10.8 and 8.45 ± 6.80 cases. Good scores had the highest frequency
in the new brief disease progress form. The highest average of results in the studied groups was
observed in brief disease progress notes of 2010. Comparison of mean scores revealed
statistically significant differences (P  <  0.05).
Conclusion: Adding a new column named "brief disease progressive note" in physician order
sheets significantly promoted the recording of disease progress and reasons for medical orders
based on SOAP note. Therefore, it is recommended to include this column in physician
order sheets.
Keywords: Medical Records; Progressive Note; Physician Order Sheet; Documentation.
