Nowadays, both professors and students believe in insufficiency of unilateral approach in academic educating. A method which is not responder for multidimensional human knowledge needs any more. These days, academic courses with this unilateral approach especially in visionary-practical sciences not only don’t create enthusiasm for acquisition of science in students but also help to Separation of knowledge from the audiences and the environment. This separation is a consequence of a ridged view to knowledge in last century which has critiqued last years. In recent decades, has tried to replace educating method based on questioning by traditional rigid ones, thus a question to be discussed at the beginning of class and this question will be involved with the student's mind then professor with the issue from different angles has tried to answer that question.
Today, the problem of lack of response of this unilateral approach in educating has the highest possible degree in landscape architecture. Landscape is an objective-subjective phenomenon of interaction of human, history and nature. In educating landscape architecture major part is depend on student`s perception and her\his interpretation of environment and landscape. Thus, educating in the field of landscape architecture seeks a complex process within the student has to read and interpret landscape and then discover the relationship of this interpretation with society, human and history formation and finally responding to the role of this formation in the state of guidance and management of goal`s achievement. In this process student`s mind, as an interpreter, is one of the main players in educating and gain landscaping knowledge and viewpoint. In this method students make questions and searching for responses in different phenomena by themselves. Journey is the best context in the face of landscapes and phenomena to forming questions and discovering for responses. With such an approach, journey is a school without walls which professors let students being free in exploring nature book and natural, cultural, urban and heritage landscapes to educate, interpret and discover knowledge and not just study. Maybe, the most important purpose of journey in discovery based educating is training students with a questioning mind.
The Landscape Association of Research Journeys has proceeded with this goal in holding long term journeys to foreign countries. India journey, in 2012 spring, was a new experience in planning and holding this educating process. India is a prepared context for mind training and based on discovery educating, A country with varied cultural, ritual and human landscapes and phenomena together that at first glance bringing thousands of questions in mind. In order to prepare the mind to explore and interpret the landscape and the phenomena and finally forming of exploring and discovering based educating and searching in India we planned two parts of perceptions; first one are immediate explores and perceives and second is the planned perceive in order to compilation of research Papers. The consequence of this journey was three short viewpoints and a research hypothesis for each member. In return, research hypothesis approved by library Studies and exploring based educating completed and ended with discovering based researching.

