Introduction & Objective: Male factor is the major cause of infertility in 20% of cases  (WHO). There are known etiologies for  70% of cases .However,   30% of infertility cases are of idio-pathic origin. The Y chromosome and micro deletion of the long arm of the Y chromosome (Yq) in three regions (AZFa, AZFb ,AZFc ) are associated with spermatogenic failure and is a major etiology for oligo and azoospermia in infertile men. With the advent of assisted re-productive technology and intracytoplasmic sperm injection, knowledge about the various factors leading to spermatogenic impairment is one of the most important aspects of scien-tific research. Therefore, this study was designed to identify the frequency of microdeletions of Yq in azoospermia and oligozoospermia males refered to Hamadan Fatemieh hospital. 
Materials & Methods: 56 infertile males with non obstructive oligozoospermia and azoosper-mia and without any cytogenetic abnormality and 44 fertile men with normal cytogenetic were included in this case-control study. Semen analysis was done is each case to determine the spermatogenic statuse. Patients with normal karyotyping were analyzed for determination of microdeleton in Y chromosome in the AZFa, AZFb and AZFC regions with multiplex PCR method. The sequence tagged sites (STS) primers sY84, sY86 (AZFa); sY127, sY134 (AZFb); sY254, sY255 (AZFc) were used for each case. 
Results: In this study the rate of mutation were 1.87% in oligo and azoospermia infertile men, 4% in azoosperm and 0% in oligospermia patients. Of 56 cases, 1 case showed deletion in AZF region ,1 deletion was in AZFa(sY84), 2 deletions in AZFb (sY127, sY134), and 1 dele-tion in AZFc (sY254). That had 1 deletion in AZF a (sY84), 2 deletions in AZFb (sY134, sY127) , and 1 deletion in AZFc(sY254). No microdeletions were seen in the SRY gene and no microdeletions were found in men in the control group. 
Conclusion : Our results emphasize that Y chromosome microdeletion analysis should be car-ried out in all patients with idiopathic azoospermia or severe oligospermia who are candi-dates for intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Moreover, it is highly suggested to perform fur-ther studies to discover the  numerous etiologies of idiopathic male infertility.
(Sci J Hamadan Univ Med Sci 2013; 19 (4):48-56)
