Objective: The purpose of this study was to examine and compare the effectiveness of achievement motivation, self-efficacy and self-esteem group trainings on self-esteem of physically disabled females in Isfahan city.
Method:Research design was semi-experimental. The statisticalpopulation includedall 18-35 year old womenmembers of Isfahan branch of the NGO named the Society of Disabled. A random sample of 80of  the statistical populationwas selected, and after responding  to Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale(RSES), forty of  the primary sample whose  self-esteem scores were lower than  the other half were  selected as the  final sample and assigned to three experimental groups and one control group randomly. Then nine weekly sessions of self esteem group training, self-efficacy group training, and achievement motivation group training were administrated for 1, 2, and 3 experimental groups respectively. At the end of all sessions, post- test (RSES) again administrated for three experimental groups and control group. For assessing subject's characteristics, in addition Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSES), a demographic characteristics questionnaire was used. Data were analyzed using analysis of covariance and LSD Post Hoc test.Probability level P < 0/05was used to test the hypotheses.
Results: Results showed a significant effect for self esteem group training(P=0/023), self-efficacy group training(P=0/006), and achievement motivation group training(P=0/016); but there was no significant difference between the effect of self esteem group training, self-efficacy group training and achievement motivation group training. Conclusion and recommendations:self esteem group training, self-efficacy group training and achievement motivation group training can be effective for enhance self-esteem of physically disabled persons and in result for their rehabilitation.Accordinglyit isproposedthat thesethree types ofeducationalprogramsbeimplementedon a regular basisinmedical centersandeducationalandnon-governmental organizationsforpeoplewithphysical disabilities.

