Extended Tourism is one of the most important alternatives for developing societies. In addition to the economic benefits of tourism, the local communities achieve sustainable development through social and cultural benefit. Experiences of different regions in tourism development indicate that local communities should be the centres of planning and activities related to tourism. Today, rural areas are none developed and developing countries encounter several economic problems including poverty and unemployment. All development activities in these areas should lead to solve or reduce the mentioned problems. In recent years, there have been several tourism programs with entrepreneurial approaches, which have been designed and implemented. Tourism and entrepreneurship are placed among youth issues in scientific world. Undoubtedly, the appropriate integration of tourism and entrepreneurship can meet the needs of villagers in addition to ensure safety and optimal excursion for tourists. For applying entrepreneurial activity in a community, essential backgrounds and infrastructures should to be provided. Nowadays, this concept is called "entrepreneurial climate”. Entrepreneurial environment that includes all elements for an entrepreneurial business in a community is needed too.
Methodology
Oraman county in Sarvabad Township in Kurdistan province in west of Iran has been selected as a unit of this study. The mentioned region is an ancient one with historical attractions, as well as cultural, social and natural ones, that have the capacity of attraction the tourists, annually. The Ceremony known as "Pir-Shalyar" is one of the tourist attractions in the region that held each year (in May) and thousands of domestic and foreign tourists participate in cultural and social events like the mentioned one. Despite the enormous potential and a positive view of the local community, the tourism industry lacks the ability to meet the economic needs of local people. The objective of this study is to assess the entrepreneurial climate in the field of rural tourism. The method of this study has been surveying one. In order to collect data, a researcher- made questionnaire was designed which its validity was confirmed by the expert and its reliability were confirmed by Pilot study in Ilam province. Total population of this case – study, have been the individuals who experienced participating in programs and activities related to tourism in rural areas. Among198 persons, 134 men were selected randomly by means of Cochrane formula. 

Results
Results showed that the Tourism and entrepreneurial activities are not organized and carried out mostly traditionally and small and medium business enterprises with a focus on the family's main economic activities in the region. Although professional training related to tourism and entrepreneurial activity has not been provided for local residents but, greatest level of participation in regional tourism related to people who have university educations. This is one of the most important characteristics of the communities that are prone to develop entrepreneurship. From the patients point of view, the most important features of the region's tourism entrepreneurial activities are factors such as: Demand for travel to the region, demand of tourists for local products, interested villages are in establishing businesses related to tourism, the expansion of local production networks between business owners and Adequate security in the region for tourism and entrepreneurial activities. The findings revealed that the Women and men who participate in the study evaluate “entrepreneurship climate” in the region in level of average, but men than women, have more positive assessment of the situation, of entrepreneurial climate. It seems that social and cultural restrictions of women in economic activities, lead to the mentioned result. The findings also indicated many differences among the view points of various people group to tourism entrepreneurship climate in the area of study. Those who earn more income from tourism activities have a greater satisfaction of the entrepreneurial climate in their region. 

Conclusion
The findings suggested that the priority elements of entrepreneurial space were different, and hence the local people believe that the factors such as interest to establish tourism enterprises and expansion of local production networks between business owners are the important factors in comparison with other factors related to entrepreneurial climate. Government support programs with private sector participation can increase the entrepreneurial approach in tourism activities.
Keywords: Rural Tourism, Tourism entrepreneurship, Entrepreneurship climate, Oraman.


