After occurring an earthquake, providing recovery and reconstruction programs and its quality and quantities very necessitate for returning to before disaster condition from point of providing habitats and infrastructures. In reconstruction after the earthquake, it must be considered in a manner of comprehensive, scientific and applied method. The dimensions of a successful reconstruction includes: considering the native architecture, supporting systems, extensive participation of all people, and finally satisfaction of the habitants. The objective of this study is to evaluate the process of reconstruction and the variables affecting the success of the reconstruction process in Shirvan County, in Borujerd Township. This study follows the method of measuring based on questionnaires. The were studied community includes the heads of the households, that used the proportional sampling method with sample volume of 190 people (Cochran). The method of this research is descriptive and analytic. For analyzing the variables, the statistic correlative method, regression, the T test, and the nonparametric statistic test have been used. The results of this research indicates that there has been a meaningful relation between successful reconstruction and using supportive systems in which the loans, by governments increased the chance of success for the reconstruction process. None of the variables- people participation and the native architecture- has been effective in this regard. Moreover, there is no relation between people participation and reconstruction and native architecture and their conformation with implemented reconstructions.

Methodology
This research studied the recovery process of the rural settlement of the Silakhor Earthquake in the province of the Lorestan. For this mean the descriptive and analytical research methods have been used, and for collecting data the documentary methods and field studies have been used. In the Field studied area some of tools like observation; interviews and completing the questionnaires have been used to collect data and information. By considering the objective of the research and analyzing reconstruction process of the damaged rural settlement of Lorestan earthquake 1385, the Spearman correlative coefficient, partial correlative, and single sample T and path analysis model have been used. So, for analyzing the reconstruction process in the mentioned area, at first, the appropriate question was the component including people participation, reconstruction accordance to local and native architecture and supportive system. The needed data were considering these issues collected by questionnaires. The statistic community was consisted of households that habitant in Shirvan county in Borujerd township. In order to determining the volume of sample that is about 190 households the Cochran equation has been used and distribution of questionnaires has been randomly completed in correspondence to amount of population of villages. 

Results
By the theoretical implemented survey and by considering combinational method in this study, 58 questions in 4 dimensions including the people participation, reconstruction process, supportive systems and native architecture were designed and tested. The results indicate that in spite of the importance of people participation and emphasizing it, based on spearman test and single sample T, the first hypothesis based on a direct correlation the people participation rate with reconstruction process efficiency is rejected. So the ratio of participation in the study area is very low and the reconstruction in future should be a risk. The Lake accordance of the constructed buildings to local and native architecture is indicated to ignore the ideas. Of people because the constructed buildings based on predetermined maps by responsible organization have the least correspondence with rural predetermined maps by responsible organization have the least correspondence with rural people necessities. Constructing small houses in accordance with urban culture, with warehouse, barn, etc. has been ignored. Interviews indicated that the participation of people was only for constructing in a defined framework. Finally an important point is the remained incompletion and semi constructed houses after passing about four and half years.

Conclusion
As it was confirmed in our hypothesis, the rate of reconstruction successfulness had a direct relation with supportive systems. According to field observing the majority of the habitauts of studied area is consisted of farmer or worker and their living level and income are low, if the supportive systems have not been support the damaged people from disasters, the progress percent of reconstruction would be very low, because most people, about 85.8 percent of respondents have used the loans. A very important point about the loans is the unsatisfied of the people for obtaining them. The amount of loans that must be paid was 6 to 8 millions, one million cash and the remaining in form of construction materials. A point that most people mentioned and believed it was the unbalancing between price and material quantity that this caused the unsatisfied and displeasure of damaged people. 


