ICT has a large potential to be useful in health care. While hospitals are now often equipped with advanced tools using digitized analysis and embedded technology for operations etc., IT based administrative tools used to coordinate activities and communicate knowledge in the area of health care have not yet been generalized. The effect of these IT/ICT tools on the life of people world over has been mostly witnessed by the urban populace. The rural population almost world over has been the least beneficiary of such technological developments with the result that the digital divide between the rural and the urban still remains an area of concern. It is in this context that an attempt has been made by the authors to assess the penetration of Information and Communication Technologies in Present Health Care System in the State of Jammu and Kashmir in India. The impact of these technologies in health care system of the state has been studied in terms of various facilities existing in various hospitals established at the village, block, district and provincial level. The authors have tried to make an extensive study of various infrastructural facilities in these hospitals along with the use of IT/ICT tools to make the best use of these facilities. The study of the existing health care system has been carried from the govt, published available literature as well as by seeking public opinion through questionnaire and personal interviews. The data so obtained from the literature and through the questionnaires has been analyzed. Based on the observations made through the data analysis and by making a thorough investigations of the similar infrastructural facilities in the neighboring states, the authors have proposed an IT/ICT supported Health Care Model for implementation in the state of Jammu and Kashmir with an objective to carry out the benefits of the facilities existing in big hospitals to the village level hospitals as well. The proposed components/activities have to - be implemented in phased manner based on the present availability of infrastructure in the state, the geographical conditions of the state and the budget involved in implementing the model.
