This research is aimed to assess the degree of job stress of disabled persons in work place, with on the standard relations a discipline to make the disabled persons exploit physical activities to decrease the stress at work place.
Methodology: The present research is of sectional descriptive kind. The content of sample includes 80 disabled employees in state administrations of Kermanshah. The date was collected by using questionnaire of job stress assess from M.A thesis of Reza Torkman. Dynamic coefficient of questionnaire was calculated by method of Cronbach’s Alpha (?=0/86). The descriptive statistics (standard deviation, mean and diagram) and inferred statistics (freedman, sample T1 and independent T) and SPSS 20 Software were used to analyze the findings. 
Findings: The Findings from descriptive result showed that among six studied factors (Relation to managers, job, and relation to coworkers, work conditions and personal characteristics), the factor of relation to managers (3/15±0/48) had the most pleasant conditions and personal conditions and job factor (2/64±0/4) had the worst conditions. The noteworthy point is that the majority of disabled are unsatisfied of not rising in their own job, and most of them believed that they hadn't gotten enough training in their job assignments. The results from one sample T1 test showed that there is a meaningful difference (P < 0/05) among the mean of these factors: manager relation, personal properties, work conditions and job. The mentioned studies indicated that the condition of studied factors is medium to low, that shows the medium to high job stress of disabled employees in state administrations of Kermanshah. Also the result from independent T1 test showed that generally the condition of studied factors in the disabled persons who had physical activities was better than that of disabled persons with no physical activity. It shows that the physical activity effects on decreasing job stress.
Discussions and conclusion: The present study showed that 19/8 percents of studied people have server stress, 56/7 percents have medium stress and 23/5 percents have low one. The obtained results showed that the disabled persons with high disabledness have higher job stress. And this can be considered as the most important reasons of stress, that this high stress can result in disorder in professional yield and subsequently decreasing satisfaction and system productivity on other hand, the disabled persons with low stress had at least eight hour physical activity during a week. The obtained results show that the job stress among disabled employees of Kermanshah's administrations is medium to high. 

