The accumulation of fatigue damage in critical structural members of the aging aircrafts is an increasingly complex and continuing high priority problem. There is growing evidence that (i) multiple site damage or multiple element damage may compromise fail safety in older aircrafts, and (ii) significant fatigue damage, with subsequent formation of cracks, may occur at locations not considered in original fatigue failure evaluations. Thus, there is now a critical need for:(i) a wide area scanning technology capable of detecting microcrack clusters over wide areas of complex shaped components, with the objective of identifying potential problem areas; and (ii) a reliable permanently mounted monitoring tool for fatigue damage detection at identified fatigue critical locations, particularly at locations that are difficult to access for inspection. A new monitoring method called ICM (Intelligent Coating Monitoring), which is based mainly on the intelligent coating sensors has the capability to monitor crack initiation and growth in fatigue test coupons has been suggested in this study. The intelligent coating sensor is normally consisted of three layers: driving layer, sensing layer and protective layer where necessary. The sensing layer is made of conductive materials and the surface cracks in substrate can be represented by the variation of the resistance of the sensing layer. Fatigue tests with ICM on the surface inside a 8.00 mm hole in an TC4 tension-tension fatigue specimen, demonstrated the capability to detect cracks with l&lt;300 mum, corresponding to the increment of the sensing layer´s resistance at the level of 0.05 Omega. Also, ICM resistance measurements correlate with crack length, permitting crack length monitoring. Numerous applications are under evaluation for ICM in difficult-to-access locations on commercial and military aircrafts. The motivation for permanently flaw-detected coating monitoring is either (i) to replace an existing inspection that re- quires substantial disassembly and surface preparation (e.g. inside the fuel tank of an aircraft), or (ii) to take advantage of early detection and apply less invasive life-extension repairs, as well as reduce interruption of service when flaws are detected. Implementation of ICM is expected to improve fleet management practices and modify damage tolerance assumptions.
