Objective: Needs, demands and expectations of patients regarding fixed dental prostheses (FDPs) are influenced by patient's factors including pattern of missing teeth, education, socio-economic status, age and oral health. These factors are explored in local patients wishing FDPs for the first time. Material and Methods: During the period between November 2004 to March 2006, partially-dentate patients (n = 100) wishing to have conventional tooth-supported FDPs at the Department of Prosthodontics, Khyber College of Dentistry Peshawar, Pakistan were interviewed and clinically examined. Data were collected, regarding their age, gender, education, socio-economic status, oral hygiene and need for mouth and tooth-preparatory work. Patient's demands, needs, expectations and patterns of missing teeth and reasons for preferring FDPs were also assessed. Data were analyzed by descriptive statistics and Chi-square test. Results: Patients were 44 males and 56 females with 92% not older than 45 years. Educated and socio-economically secure patients were 81% and 90% respectively. Only 2% were regular dental-attenders. A substantial need for pre-prosthetic & preparatory procedures in the form of periodontal (80%), conservative (76%) and dental extractions (80%) was noted. The pattern of missing teeth reflected bounded-spaces (142) and distal-extension-spaces (8). Bounded- spaces were posterior (109) and anterior (33). Reasons for consultation to have FDPs were functional in 56 % and aesthetics in 44%. Reasons for preferring FDPs were; psychological (90%), security (76%), easy to maintain (73%) improved-chewing (67%) and aesthetic (54%). Expectations were functional in 79% patients. Expectation for improved function was noted in 86 % males and 73% females. Expectation for improved-aesthetics was seen in 93.2% males. Conclusion: Demand and need for FDPs was higher in males and in those with better social, educational and economic levels. Need for FDPs was realistic and for enhancement of chewing-function.
