introduction/Objective. Benign prostatic hyperplasia is one of the most common diseases in older men. The objective of this study was to evaluate the impact of the surgical treatment of the benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) with the methods of open prostatectomy (OP) and transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) on the quality of life. Methods. The research material was based on 80 patients, out of whom 40 patients were treated with the method of open prostatectomy (Group A), and the other 40 patients with the method of transurethral resection of prostate gland (Group B) due to benign prostatic hyperplasia. All patients were under the age of 80 years old (approximate age in Group A 70.23 with variation interval of 21 years old, and in Group B 69.37 with variation interval of 22 years old), with the International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) value >19 points, postvoid residual urine higher than 150 ml, the weight of benign prostatic gland hyperplasia tissue over 30 grams for method of prostate transurethral resection, and over 80 grams for the method of open prostatectomy. The quantification of the quality of life, as a consequence of urinary symptoms, was done by the Quality of Life Index (QLI) which is question N° 8 in IPSS. All patients were determined the value of this score before the operation, and then in postoperative period in time intervals of 4.8 and 12 weeks. Results. The QLI arithmetic mean, before the operation, was 5.55 points in Group A, and 5.45 points in Group B. During postoperative checkups in time intervals of 4.8 and 12 weeks, the arithmetic means in Group A were 0.975, 0.450 and 0.100 points, and in Group B 1.850, 1.700 and 1.575 points. By analyzing the obtained results, there was a highly statistically significant difference between preoperative test results and the results during all the postoperative checkups in both groups, A and B. By testing the difference of the QLI arithmetic mean between the patients in both groups, preoperatively there was no statistically significant difference, but during all postoperative checkups, there was a highly statistically significant difference between the test values. Conclusion. The surgical treatment of BPH leads to significant improvement of the quality of life, as a consequence of urinary symptoms. The improvement of the quality of life was more evident in patients whose BPH was treated with the OP method. 
