background: The transient left ventricular apical ballooning syndrome, also known as takotsubo cardiomyopathy was first described in Japan approximately 20 years ago (Satoh and coworkers, 1991). It was later described elsewhere as well and is being increasingly recognized. Takotsubo Cardiomyopathy characterized by transient apical and midventricular LV dysfunction in the absence of significant coronary artery disease that is trig­gered by emotional or physical stress. Its name refers to a contraption used for catching octopuses and suggests the aspect assumed by the ventricle during the systole due to the typical regional wall motion abnormalities that occur after onset. Takotsubo cardiomiopathy occurring mainly in post-menopausal women, echocardiography in the Takotsubo cardiomyopathy reveals during its acute phase a ballooning resembling the octopus trap configuration-the apex and lateral ventricular segments are hypokinetic while the base is hyperkinetic - along with reduced ejection fraction. Ventricular function will usually recover within a few days/weeks. Objective and purpose: The objective of this study is to determine the role of echocardiography in detect­ing and establishing the diagnosis of Takotsubo cardiomiopathy in patients with suspect acute coronary syndrome and during the follow up period. Patients and methods: The study covered 12 adult patients the majority are women (92%) who were subjected to echocardiography evaluation as part of the clinical cardiological examination due to suspect acute coronary syn­drome or Takotsubo Stress Cardiomyopathy. The patients were examined on an ultrasound machine Philips iE 33 xMatrix, ATL HDI and GE Vived 7 equipped with all cardiologic probes for adults and multi-plan TEE probes. We evaluated clinical characteristics, LV systolic function, biomarkers, and prognosis in all patients. Results: Among all the patients referred for Echo- cardiographic evaluation for left ventricle motion abnormalities with suspect acute coronary syndrome, the echo exam revealed 12 patients with acute apical ballooning which involving the left ventricular apex and med-ventricle. The triggering factors were physical stress in 4 patients (33%) and emotional stress in 8 patients (67%). The initial symptom was chest pain (n=8, 67%) rather than dyspnea (n=4, 33%). An initial electrocardiogram (EKG) presented ST-elevation (n=10, 83%) and T-wave inversion (n=2, 17%), other data are shown on Table 2. Among the all patients 8 of them (66%) had normal EF by the 1st follow up (47 ± 51 days), and the rest 4 patients (34%) had normal EF by 68 ± 96 days. Conclusion: Wide­spread uses of echocardiography has contributed to more frequent recog­nition of Takotsubo stress cardiomy­opathy and highlight the central role of this noninvasive method from an echocardiographers' perspective.
