Introduction: Laboratory medicine, medi¬cal-biochemical diagnosis in Primary health care is much represented. By organization of family medicine medical-biochemical diagnosis is defined as a branch of diag¬nostic services in primary health care. These procedures are not sufficiently familiar to users and doctors, for that are very often necessary the direct telephone communica¬tion between them. To make the results of laboratory tests needed are huge material resources. This is evident in the economic analysis where laboratory tests are valued with a score of: search by type and mate¬rial resources expended for analytical examination. These technical and financial performances of laboratory medicine are not appropriately classified as blatant as that in other industries, technology and other primary health care (PHC) and family medi¬cine (FM). Goal: The overall objective of the research is to define a model of efficiency (or effectiveness) of medical-biochemical diagnosis for users with the requirements of units of family medicine (PM), in a represen¬tative sample of patients in the unit for the laboratory diagnosis of the Primary Health Care Center Gracanica. Confirm what is the usefulness of the application of laboratory diagnosis in family medicine. Determine the frequency of the need for laboratory tests in the therapeutic treatment of major diseases. Evaluate the need for using laboratory di¬agnostics to try to prevent major diseases. Promote the available test-index profile of laboratory diagnostics for early detection of risk factors for major diseases. Evaluate the continued use of the (systematic reviews) laboratory diagnosis gives a picture of the health status of individuals in family practice. Promote the available test-index profile of laboratory diagnosis of system¬atic reviews. Conduct follow-up evaluation model of laboratory diagnosis in family medicine. Determine if "analysis models monitoring of laboratory diagnosis in family medicine 'provides an adequate evaluation of laboratory test results and whether it can serve as a basis for writing scientific and technical publications. Material and methods: The study included a total of 1000 respondents. All subjects were users of primary health care in Primary Health Care Center Gracanica (Tuzla Canton) in primary health care units have received requests for laboratory diagnosis. This paper is an analysis of the representation requirements for the laboratory diagnosis by doctors in primary health care and the most frequent diseases in primary care. An analysis is made of laboratory test results, based on requests for laboratory diagnosis by doctors and illnesses in primary care. Results: The economic value of 5333 laboratory tests was 84 312 points (1 point is 0.80 KM). Of the total value of the index score require¬ments of GPs are 44, 1%, the requirement of family doctors account for 40% and re¬quirements of other specialists make up 15, 9%. From general practice tests with normal results carry 32.6% of points and found pathological results bear 11.5%; while of family medicine physicians found normal results carry 28, 5% of points, the results of pathological tests were 11, 4% points. Discussion: By percentage most common laboratory tests are within the leading disease that is the metabolic syndrome, in the demands of doctors in family practice were as follows: Cholesterol, Triglycerides, glucose, ALT, AST, SE, urine creatinine and urea. General practitioners are demanding the most cholesterol and triglycerides tests, and a family medicine doctors are demand¬ing less cholesterol and triglycerides and higher Ca, P, fibrinogen, ALT, AST, urea and glucose levels as the economic cost of these tools has its justification. Conclusions: Based on the obtained parameters and re¬sults of laboratory tests can be determined: prevalence, benefit, benefits of certain tests (test profile search) laboratory diagnosis: the systematic reviews, for the prevention of health; tests to monitor disease (criteria, standards, i.e. protocols for diagnosis). But it is proved that the laboratory diagnosis is not used rationally. It also suggested better communication and organization of family medicine and laboratory diagnosis when it comes to common diseases and facilitate the exchange of information with other health care institutions which may be of wider public interest.
