Introduction/Objective. Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) is a gold treatment method in older men who develop lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) which are caused by benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and benign prostatic obstruction (BPO). The objective of the study was to assess the impact of BPH surgical treat¬ment with TURP method on the quality of life, as a consequence of urinary symptoms. Material and methods. The research material was based on 40 patients who, due to BPH, were treated with the method of transurethral resection. International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) was used in the research i.e. question N° 8 that relates to the quality of life, as a consequence of the urinary symptoms. The criteria for the patients to be selected for this type of BPH surgical treatment were good general status of the patient, age under 80, the weight of benign prostatic gland hyperplasia tissue 30-80 grams, postvoid residual urine (PVR) higher than 150 ml, IPSS value >19 points, and Index of Quality of Life (IQL) values > 3 points. All patients, first preoperatively, and then postoperatively, gave answers to IPSS IQL in time intervals of 4, 8 and 12 weeks. Results. Difference testing of IQL arithmetic means (AM) between results before the operation, then during the first, second and third checkup was performed with the t-test and Wilcoxon test of equivalent pairs, and has shown that there is a highly statistically significant difference between preoperative values and the values during all the postop¬erative checkups. Taking into consideration the age subgroups (20 patients between 59 and 69 years and 20 patients between 70 and 80 years), difference testing of arithmetic means between results before the operation and first, second and third checkup, isolated, for each age subgroup, was carried out. It has demonstrated that there is a statistically significant difference between preoperative values and values during all postoperative checkups. Difference testing of arithmetic means between the stated age groups has also been conducted. The t-test and Mann- Whitney test have been used for this purpose and have shown that there is no statistically significant difference between preoperative test results and the results during all postop¬erative checkups. Conclusion. The quality of life, as a consequence of urinary symptoms, has significantly improved after the BPH treatment with TURP method. The impact of TURP on the quality of life is not related to age i.e. TURP is equally efficient regardless of patient's age.
