Objective: Youngsters like to experiment with risky life stiles, without adequate knowledge about long-term health effects. Bosnia and Herzegovina is currently going through transition period and is a postwar society with various risk factors for drugs abuse (economic, social and health). The main objective of the research was to describe adolescents behavior in consumption of alcohol and in relation to area type, gender, religion, age, parental attitude, friends and to investigate effect of biological hereditary factors related to certain behavior. Methods:This epidemiological research was done in urban and rural areas of Sarajevo Canton, involving 368 adolescents: 170 males, 198 females; aged 12-17, with equal urban and rural distribution. The research tool used was Q 2004 (K.B. Kelly, 2000). Using this tool, impact of hereditary factors related to tobacco, alcohol and drugs was explored and EPI info was used for statistical analysis. Results: Out of total number of individuals involved in the study 25.8% were found to be cigarette smokers, 39.4% consumed alcohol, and 2.2% consumed marijuana. Out of total number of adolescents who use alcohol, 43.4% are from rural and 56.6% urban area; 69.0% come from high school and 31% from primary; 53.1% are male; 46.9% female; 44.8% alcohol consumers smoke tobacco vs. 13.5%; 4.8% use drugs and alcohol vs. 0.4%. Mean age of alcohol consumption beginning was 14. Results determine genealogical analysis of frequency of consuming alcohol and tobacco related paternal side (maternal side rarely) and adolescent. It is not proved that hereditary factors play important role in use of these substances. Impact of hereditary factors among drug users is negative. Conclusion: Adolescents in developing countries tend to abuse psychoactive substances. It is determined that parents (particularly father) use tobacco and alcohol, but rarely. None of above mentioned family members abuse drugs. Therefore, impact of hereditary factors related to abuse drugs is not proved. These results could be used to develop an appropriate prevention strategy. It is necessary to be aware of all relevant risk factors. Quality of life depends of these factors, and treatment should be multidisciplinary for these cases, including medical, genetic and dental experts in the field.
