Problem: Laboratory medicine, medical-biochemical diagnosis in primary health care is much represented. By organization of family medicine medical-biochemical diagnosis is defined as a branch of diagnostic services in primary health care. For these actions is necessary in the morning prior to admission of users and their demands that all jobs are properly prepared. On previous day should be provided and prepared: accessories, reagents and machines. Morning daily routine work of preceding control and calibration equipment, methods and process quality control of work in the laboratory. Only after the fulfillment of the procedures followed overview of search control of samples. After validating the results of daily quality control and after they met the criteria can be analytically examined samples from users. These procedures are not sufficiently familiar to users and doctors, for that are very often necessary the direct telephone communication between them. To make the results of laboratory tests needed are huge material resources. This is evident in the economic analysis where laboratory tests are valued with a score of: search by type and material resources expended for analytical examination. These technical and financial performances of laboratory medicine are not appropriately classified as blatant as that in other industries, technology and other primary health care (PHC) and family medicine (FM). Goal: The overall objective of the research is to define a model of efficiency (or effectiveness) of medical-biochemical diagnosis for users with the requirements of units of family medicine (FM), in a representative sample of patients in the unit for the laboratory diagnosis of the Primary Health Care Center Gracanica. Confirm what is the usefulness of the application of laboratory diagnosis in family medicine. Determine the frequency of the need for laboratory tests in the therapeutic treatment of major diseases. Evaluate the need for using laboratory diagnostics to try to prevent major diseases. Material and methods: The study included a total of 1000 respondents. All subjects were users of primary health care in Primary Health Care Center Gracanica (Tuzla Canton) in primary health care units have received requests for laboratory diagnosis. This paper is an analysis of the representation requirements for the laboratory diagnosis by doctors in primary health care and the most frequent diseases in primary care. An analysis is made of laboratory test results, based on requests for laboratory diagnosis by doctors and illnesses in primary care. Made is analysis of the presence of normal and pathological laboratory test results from the request for the laboratory diagnosis by doctors in primary health care. Made is an analysis of the most common laboratory tests requests, and based on requests for laboratory diagnosis by doctors in primary health care and the most frequent diseases in primary health care. Incorporated is the economic analysis of laboratory test requests for the laboratory diagnosis by doctors in primary health care and the most frequent diseases in primary care. Incorporated is the economic analysis of the most common laboratory test requirements for the laboratory diagnosis by doctors in primary health care and the most frequent diseases in primary health care. For the statistical analysis are used the Student t test and Chi square test. Results and Conclusions: Based on the obtained parameters and results of laboratory tests can be determined: prevalence, benefit, benefits of certain tests (test profile search) laboratory diagnosis: the systematic reviews, for the prevention of health; tests to monitor disease (criteria, standards, i.e. protocols for diagnosis). But it is proved that the laboratory diagnosis is not used rationally. It also suggested better communication and organization of family medicine and laboratory diagnosis when it comes to common diseases and facilitate the exchange of information with other health care institutions which may be of wider public interest.
