On behalf of the Technical Program Committee, we welcome all of you to the IEEE Computer, Communications and Applications Conference (IEEE ComComAp 2012) in the beautiful campus of Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China! We are indeed delighted that the conference aims to providing a premier forum for presentation of research results and experience reporting on the cutting edge research in the general areas of computing and communications and their applications. This year, we received more than 200 submissions from 25 countries. Each paper received at least three peer technical reviews, comprised of more than 120 TPC members from academia, government laboratories, and industries. After carefully examining all the received review reports, the IEEE ComComAp 2012 TPC finally selected about 38% high-quality papers for presentation at the conference and publication in the IEEE ComComAp 2012 proceedings. Each day will start with a keynote speaker chosen from renowned world-class leaders in the area. On Wednesday, Dr. Wu Chou, IEEE Fellow and Chief IT Scientist, Head of Huawei Shannon Lab. Huawei, China will talk about the &#8220;Internet, Web, and Cloud for Next Generation IT.&#8221; And on Thursday, Dr. Vijay Bhargava, IEEE ComSoc President &amp; Professor at UBC, Canada, will highlight the challenges in research issues of &#8220;Green Cellular Networks.&#8221; This year, the technical sessions reflect the growing interest in a wide range of spectrum, including wireless communications and networks, computing aspects, and applications of these technologies in our daily lives. Outstanding papers will be selected and invited by three Special Issues in well-known international journals. Our objective in the future is to increase the quality and therefore reduce the acceptance rate further to reach 30% and less. In addition, we would like to increase the number of Tracks to cover other areas and introduce Workshops that of interest to meet - he conference theme.
