Mentoring enables staff to acquire skills needed to progress successfully in their work environments. The main objective of the study was to establish if staff members at the PoN are interested in the concept of introducing mentoring programmes. Policies adopted by tertiary educational institutions play a key role in determining the future of an institution. The enquiry employed a case study approach because it dealt with a specific institution in Namibia. A triangulation method was utilised to solicit information from academics, administrative and support staff by conducting semi-structured interviews with HoDs and sectional heads. A closed-ended questionnaire was distributed to 230 staff members of which 130 responded, which gave a considerable satisfactorily response rate of 65%. Research proved conclusively that formal mentoring programmes be introduced for academic staff members. A total of 86.9% of staff members supported the idea of introducing mentoring programmes. Therefore, the researchers recommended that the PoN should introduce an effective formal mentoring programme for junior academic staff members. The study only involved Namibians and permanent resident staff that have been employed at the institution, and hence excluded non-Namibians, who are appointed on contract. It will be in the best interest of PoN that a study should be conducted to investigate the views of non-Namibians regarding mentoring programmes. In future when formal mentoring programmes are introduced, a study should be conducted regarding effects of mentoring programmes on junior staff member's job performance. This paper offers PoN management an insight into the views of employees regarding mentoring programmes. The value of this paper is that it would benefit the institution, which finds it difficult to attract and retain qualified people, due to higher salaries being offered in private and other public sectors. Developing staff through mentoring programmes will uplift the nation, which has a skills shortage and encourage more young talent to take up a career in academia.
