The purpose of this research paper was to find out the Ethiopian managers behavioural patterns and managerial competencies. The study explored this point from two dimensions (employees' view point and the managers' view point). Relevant literature reviews on behavioural patterns and managerial abilities with specific emphasis on the behaviours of managers and their competencies were made. Structured questionnaires and sporty personal interviews were administered to 500 managers and 2000 employees of Ethiopian corporate organizations located in the Capital City, Addis Ababa. Two types of questionnaires were prepared, one for measuring behavioural patterns and the other for measuring managerial competencies of the managers under observation. The questionnaires were administered to both the employees and managers. The survey data were analyzed by using statistical package for Social Sciences (SPSS) and microsoft excel software packages. The finding of this research showed that the responses from the managers and the employees with regard to the managerial behaviours and competencies were strongly contrastive for both the variables measured (managerial behaviour and managerial competence). The managers were found to view themselves as behaviourally positive (assertive) and managerially competent while the employees were found to view their managers as behaviourally either submissive or aggressive and managerially incompetent. The contrasting view of the managers and employees on the behavioural patterns and managerial competencies of the management community would establish a foundation based on which strategic corrective action plans can be put in place for the future. These corrective plans include skill development plans and behaviour oriented trainings. This paper puts forward thoughtful views of the behavioral patterns and managerial competencies of Ethiopian managers. It is analyzed both from employees' view point and managers' view point with the purpose of providing objective data to help design action plans that will motivate the prevalence of appropriate managerial behaviour and competencies.
