Problem statement: The objective of this study was to identify, analyze and build the force equation that involved the velocity, acceleration, angle and distance at the ankle when making the instep kick. Approach: One subject which is a male national soccer player had been chosen as a subject for the study. The subject was selected from professional soccer player with average heights of Asian. Subject has to make first step run instep kick which used internal body energy. Subject needs to repeat this method for 5 times to get the average data. The variable examined was the velocity, acceleration, distance and the angle of the ankle that significant or not significant to the force model when instep kick being made. Biomechanical analysis will be done be the application of Silicon Pro Coach and Statistical Package for The Social Sciences (SPSS) for the statistical analysis. The video of instep kicking will be capture during the study to get a real visual of kicking to be analyzed. From that, the data for velocity, acceleration, angle of ankle and distance when kicking being made can be verified. All the data was measured using by Silicon Pro Coach which is capable to measure the velocity, acceleration, distance and the angle of the ankle. Further, the equation that related with the variables will identify according the result from SPSS which is from table of summary for regression model, ANOVA of regression model and coefficient of regression model for each variable. From there, the variables will be recognized significant or insignificant to the force model and the force equation model will be determined. Results: The Highest average force and average velocity for this study is 9866.4 N and 15.952 m sec-1. Other than that, the objective to come out with one force equation which cover all the parameters involved has been done using SPSS software which includes some assumptions. Conclusion: The study revealed that the dominant variables contribute to the force rate is the velocity and the distance. From this study, it will help our soccer team to build and define the best solution to improve their performance.
