Objective: The aim of this study was to evaluate the relation between arthroscopic findings and functional outcomes in patients with septic arthritis of the knee joint, treated with arthroscopic debridement and irrigation. Methods: Twenty patients (17 male, 3 female; mean age: 31 years [5-63 years]) with knee sep¬tic arthritis treated with arthroscopic debridement and irrigation in our clinic between 2004-2007 were included in the study. The decision for arthroscopic debridement was made based on the clinical findings, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein level and the aspiration of the affected knee. During the arthroscopic debridement, the joint was staged according to Gachter criteria. Continuous irrigation system was set up for all cases following surgery. After the sur¬gery, the Bussiere functional scale was used for clinical evaluation. The mean follow-up period was 29±11months (range 13-54 months). The McNemar test was used in comparing the results. The Spearman correlation coefficient was used in the correlation analysis. The level of signifi¬cance was set at 0.05. Results: The culture was positive in 3 cases, and negative in 8 cases who exhibited gram (+) cocci in gram stains. In nine cases, cultures were negative and no microorganisms were detect¬ed in gram stains. According to the arthroscopic Gachter classification, 4 cases (20%) were Stage 1, 10 cases (50%) were Stage 2, 5 cases (25%) Stage 3 and 1 case (5%) was Stage 4. There was a statistically significant difference between the mean functional score of the knees with differ¬ing Gachter stages (McNemar test, p=0.003). There was a statistically significant and strong cor¬relation between Gachter score and functional results (correlation coefficient: 0.780; p<0.001). Conclusion: Advanced arthroscopic findings are associated with poor functional results in patients with septic arthritis of the knee joint. In addition, the time between the initial symptoms and the surgery directly affects the functional results.
