Plants infected by arbuscularmycorrhizal fungi can tolerate and recover more rapidly from different biotic and abiotic stresses such as soil water deficits than uninfected plants.Thereby, study of the dominant mycorrhiza species in the fields under drought stress is very useful for increasing the crop productivity in these conditions andpromising for biological fertilizer production in the future. The objective of this research was to study the variations in morphological and molecular diversity of arbuscularmycorrhizal fungi (AMF) and identification of dominant AMF in the wheat and barley fields of some arid and semi-arid regions of Iran. For this purpose, about 66 samples containing root and rhizospher soils of wheat and barley plants were collected from some arid and semi-arid regions of Iran (Isfahan, Tehran, Ghazvin, Arak and Tabriz). After trap culture of observed mycorrhiza in the samples, they were identified using morphological and molecular techniques. The ITS-rDNA of AMF in the root DNA extracts of wheat and barley was amplified with the primer pair LSU-Glom1/SSU-Glom1 as specific primer for AMF and ITS4/ITS5 as general primers in the first and second reactions of PCR (nested PCR), respectively. Aliquots of the positive second PCR products were cloned. Positive colonies were digested with Taq1. The restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) patterns of digested samples were compared and 1-3 representatives of each pattern at each cloning reaction were sequenced. Morphological and molecular diversity of AMF showed that more than 90% AMF observed in the regions belong to genus Glomus, which coordinates with the morphological studies and followed by G. intraradices. Also these studies confirmed the presence of following species in some regions: G. fasciculatum, G. geosporum, G. sinosum, G. constrictum, 
G. macrocarpum, and Glomus sp. and Acaulospora (Acaulospora sp.). It is important to note that the species G. etunicatu and G. dimorphicum were not detected in the morphological studies and Glomusmosseae was the most dominant AMF species in the all studied regions.

