The objective of this study was to compare the efficiency of antimicrobial drugs and PGF2? in a new endometritis treatment protocol.
Reproductive tracts of 126 dairy cows were first examined by rectal palpation and then by vaginoscopy approximately in 30 days after parturition.  Endometritis was confirmed by visualizing pus in external cervical os by vaginoscopy.  Then the cows with mucupurulant endometritis (degree=2) were randomly categorized in 3 groups as follow: Group A) Intrauterine infusion of 2500mg of OTC (5%) in two consecutive days and then evaluation of their uterine discharge by estrus mucus of their heats and/or vaginoscopy one week after the first treatment.  If needed, another infusion of the OTC (2500mg) was injected into the uterus and response to the treatment was evaluated by examining estrus mucus and/or vaginoscopy one week later.  Group B) Intrauterine infusion of 50ml of povidone – Iodine solution (5%) in two consecutive days which the protocol timing and evaluation of the response to treatment was done just as group A.  Group C) Injection of 1 or 2 or 3 doses of cloprostenol (500mg/IM) in 12 days interval and then evaluation of uterine discharge by inspection of estrus mucus and/or vaginoscopy 7 days after the first, second or third injections of the drug.  All cows with clear estrus mucus (at least 42 days after parturition) were artificially inseminated and pregnancy diagnosis was done on day 45 after AI.
X2 test, fisher test & ptchouprof correlation coefficient were used for Statistical analysis.
Subsequent reproductive performance of cows in 3 groups compared by reproductive indices (conception rate, the treatment to conception interval, and clearance of uterine discharge).
Due to labor of intrauterine infusion of drugs, high irritating effect of OTC and Betadine on endometrium and inducing necrotizing endometritis, veterinary services and drug costs, antibiotic residues in milk, and also better efficacy and response of PGF2? in comparison with two other drugs in our study, it seems that injection of PGF2? is of superior and better method than the two other methods to treat mucopurulant endometritis

