Ownership is an important element for sustainability development in natural resource management. Rangelands vegetations are important factor for produce in traditional herding therefore recognition of different utilization methods and management of this vegetation resource production for animal grazing and rangelands condition is very important. So this research carried out in 2009 in winter rangelands at Semnan province. The objective of this research is to comparison different utilization methods exist between rural and immigrant ranchers on rangelands condition.

Methodology
Reference population in this study according to the grazing license, was divided to private exploitation, collective exploitation and councilor exploitation. Based on stratified random sampling method and Cochran formula, the sample volumes 50 of Rangelands were estimated. For data collection we used questioner and field survey. Questioner was included multiple question and also interview forms. In general 93 people in order to completing questioner for private exploitation one person, for collective exploitation two people and for councilor exploitation at least two people were interviewed. For validity of questioner were used academic members (three people) specialist of executive department (two people) and specialist in social sciences (one people) and for reliability was used Cranach's alpha. Range condition evaluated based on recommended manner of American forest protection organization (four factors) Include soil protection, vegetation cover percentage, plant combination and plant healthy. 

Results
Descriptions result showed that in this area 66% of stockholders used rangeland as collective exploitation, 20% as councilor exploitation and 14% as private exploitation. So state that range management in this area is in critical situation. With increasing of stockholders in a rangeland will increase the number of animals in unit area and vegetation will destroyed. Appreciation result showed that there is significant differences between different utilization methods with rangeland condition and degradation (P < 0.05). Result of T student analyze showed that there is not significant differences between range degradation with illegal livestock manager and invade to rangeland from neighbors (P > 0.05), But there is significant difference between unseasonable and over grazing with range degradation (P < 0.05).

Conclusion
It can conclude that whatever rangeland used as councilor exploitation because of irresponsibility of persons in grazing place and over grazing, range condition become poor. Finally we can say that in single utilization because of less exploitation, consolidate management and less competition, it has the best condition between different utilization methods in this area, where as in collective exploitation and councilor exploitation because of disturbance in rangelands management, severalty of exploiters, existence of several flock and competition between them in entrance time and grazing to rangelands have not good condition.


