It is possible when forming a framework to select appropriate indicators and
represent sustainable development and efficient tool to analyze, measure and
evaluate them. Because the framework of appropriate and efficient tool to evaluate
and measure the sustainability, are credibility findings that promote scientific
research and increase the reliability of space-making decisions managers and policy
makers. Accordingly, is applied since the model and techniques several different
levels to assess and evaluate sustainable development, but have not achieved a good
framework for sustainability evaluation, especially in rural areas. Therefore the key
objective of this paper is to identify several evaluation methods of sustainability and
with this comprehensive approach the choice to assess the sustainability evaluation.
Therefore, theoretical literature was considered an integrated approach for
assessment and evaluation of the sub- based on multi criteria techniques to study
TOPSIS- FUZZY. More was selected to study village of Komijan Township as case
study, based on approach measures form Cochran sample of 430 households
questionnaire were collected data.
Results & Discussion
The main objective of this paper is to combine and integrate environmental,
economic and social impact assessment procedures in order to support decisionmaking
in the context of rural sustainable development in the Komijan Township.
Calculation results showed grace villages respectively are entitled Fazlabad Aliabad
score 0/696 and 0/666 of high and stable levels of rural Chalmyan and Ksrasf level
less stable than other settlements. Thus Chalmyan and Ksrasf have a low degree of
sustainability in the other rural Points area and this model could well express the
sustainability gradation among rural of this region. So the result of study and
observation are adopted with current objectivity in rural settlement.
Conclusion
The conclusion of this combination of literature and field studies is that if SDIs are
to contribute substantially to the increased sustainability of rural systems, they must
be applied in planning and decision making. Sound accounting and reporting
practices are prerequisites for other SDI applications. In the fields of accounting and
reporting, the rural studied can learn from the world experience and its
implementation of tools such as EMS and sustainability reporting, a process that has
Rural Research Quarterly Spring 2011
already started. Business, on the other hand, broadly speaking and judging from the
literature studied, could most likely increase its sustainability performance by
learning from the comparatively deep understanding of environmental issues,
including cause-effect relationships. For rural areas of significant characteristics
with particular problems and situations, suitable and accordant rural development
measures have to be prepared and implemented. Still, a good understanding of rural
sustainable issues among practitioners, will not lead to any practical changes as long
as this understanding does not reach decision makers in rural area, which again
points to the importance of SDA in planning and decision making
