People have been trying to have a good life from many centuries ago. But always main problem is that what is the ideal life? In this direction various definitions and subjective and objective indicators about the quality of life are proposed and there are many problems to and acceptable universal definition in order to recognize the suitable indicators and its measuring. We should announce that the life quality is several affected by time and place and the categories and forming factors are different in time periods, geographical place, and the level of development. With this description, the current study is trying to answer this question; how is the life in the view point of sample society? And whether the spatial distribution affects the life quality? Research method is descriptive-analytical. To analyze the data from field operations the descriptive and deductive statistics (T test, variance analysis) methods are used and then the GIS software is used to show the spatial distribution. The sample society in this study is the villages of center part of Delfan Township with a population of 81039 people equivalent with 12451 families. The sampling method of this clustering study is multi-stages that are selected by the proportionate assignment of 21 villages. To complete the questionnaire 315 people from the family supervisors considered as the sample society. The results show that according to viewpoints of sample society the education quality,  residential environment quality, physical environment quality, health and security quality, earning and occupation quality are evaluated  lower than the average and social cooperation and correlation quality of sample society is evaluated at the average level.  Also the results show that in villages of center part of Delfan township in all categories that affect the life quality a meaning full different in place situation and space perspective cooled be seen, in a case that the in habitants of the bucolic villages have more satisfaction from the effective categories on life quality and in second level are the mountainous and hillside villages. Also in apace perspective there was a meaning full difference in all categories (environmental frame and social quality). Except in economic category that has no meaning full difference. 

Methodology
In this research for assessment the main basis which relate to the quality of life in clouding mind features of education quality, health and security quality, residential environment quality, environmental quality, substructure quality, income and employment, spending the free time quality and solidity quality  are assessed and evaluated in the view of sample society this is a descriptive-analytical study. The rural people of the center part of Delfan town are the statistical societies that contain six rural districts which live in mountainous, hillside, bucolic fields. Sampling method of this clustering study is multi-stages. Devotion toward the populated villages in each village, the sample villages were selected and totally 21 villages were selected as the sample society among 219 populated villages. Also for filling the questionnaires in every sample village, equally 15 family supervisors were selected and because the analysis unit of current study is the supervisor of the statistical society families, totally about 315 people as the sample society were selected among family supervisors of 21 villages to implement the research. For analyzing the data of field operation the descriptive and deductive (t test, variance analysis) statistic methods were used. So comparison the average of every dimensions of quality of life based on the number of categories, the average was regarded as the base point to evaluate the quality of life. Also, for answering the second question that if the space dispensation influences the quality of life? The unilateral variance analysis in the case of normal and equal variances for comparison the dimension at the level of sample villages was applied and then GIS software was used to show the space dispensation.
Results
This study tends to evaluated the satisfaction of quality of life in rural parts in the viewpoint of sample society so 68 indices in 4 framework social, economic, environmental and physical were designed and t test and we can deduct from the results that the center part of Delfan town is in basic challenges in this mater. Analyzing the view point of rural in habitants in Delfan center part by simple-sample t test indicates that among 8 variable which influence the quality of life the determined education, health and security, income and employment substructure, environmental, are below the average and solidity quality is upper the average society also the results demonstrate that the situation of natural location of habitations influence the life quality and in habitants satisfaction in a case that the results of Tuky test is based on effectiveness of life quality from the real situation of villages as in all categories that affect the life quality (framework, environmental and social quality).

Conclusion
The Bucolic villages have obtained the most satisfaction among the inhabitants. The hillside villages are placed in second category of satisfaction and in the third place the mountainous villages has obtained the lowest satisfaction. The results also reveal that the distance dimension affects the life quality, the villages in distance of 11-20 km from the center of the town have a better situation in affective categories of life quality such as framework quality, social quality and totally all dimensions of life quality in a comparison with villages in distance of 21-30, 31—40 km and also the villages with the lower distance of 10 km. 


