The Concept of ‘development of rural life’ is neither simple nor exactly definable; but the dimensions, drivers and barriers of progress are multiple. Perceptions and motivations of people about the progress are varied, so it is a chaotic and unspecific concept. In rural studies, first of all, with considering both subjective and objective geographical, situation, one would respect perceptions and insights of rustics, because these perceptions can represent the subjective realities as well as the objective ones. Secondly, the real essential Dimensions and elements of many concepts (for example perceptions of rustics from rural, rural life, progress, etc.) cannot be explored with one of the qualitative or quantitative methods. In many researches about rural development, progressing the rural life is measured through quantitative methods. The main disadvantage of this method is that the villagers minds are not involved, and therefore they usually have a passive role. Most importantly, success in decision-making and planning for rural development depend on the fact that “the whole community must be given an active role (not a passive one) in all phases of planning. By analyzing the issues and topics related to the human and social aspects, putting the thinker human at the center of geographical analysis and recognizing the mental plans and deep perceptions of places, researchers must use both quantitative and qualitative methods, because each of them has its own capabilities and limitations. Therefore, to explain the problem of people’s lives, the appropriate mixed Methodology should be chosen, because this can reflect both personal and public Geographies Mixed methodology is useful in this respect. The aim of this research is exploring the different views and perceptions about the progress of community life in Dosari Village-Jiroft plain via a mixed Methodology. In this research, the mentioned methodology could be conceived as a hybrid of qualitative and quantitative one, because it combines mathematical procedures like factor analysis with a genuine constructivist and interpretative approach to a given concept or topic.

Methodology
The methodology in this research includes the following several steps as follows: A) Definition and delimitation of an issue- the analyzing issue must be determined in all related fields; B) Exploratory interviews; C) Selecting the meaningful statements or items- the statements should be articulated in the considered language (The statements were obtained from the exploratory interviews); D) Statistical analysis: like ‘normal’ factor analysis, the statistical procedure of this research applies a principal component analysis in order to isolate common factors; and E) Interpretation: At this stage, the results of the exploratory interviews, questionnaires and interviews with experts, are placed in contact with each other. Here, researchers placed theirselves in the hermeneutical tradition that called for the constant feedback between the empirical survey, the processing and the interpretation of results. In order to perform the exploratory interviews, 25 persons (the residents of Dosary) have been selected. Also, In order to perform quantitative analysis, 70villagers were randomly selected: (2 persons were members of the village council). The Councils "as an expert," Confirm and amplify the results of interviews and questionnaires.


Results
The distinct perceptions of progress are identified as an idyllic, a progressive (regardless the structures and constraints.), a reform-oriented (progressive view accompanied by the consideration of structures), and a conservationist view. Despite the qualitative results, it was found that there is no significant difference between public perceptions and views. Therefore, it should be possible to accept each of the mentioned extracted factors in development of rural lives at Dosary. Interviews with village councils strengthened the results of prior phases and represented their true extent. According to the village- Councils, the whole perceptions of people are consisted and coincided with thoughts of experts; and the members always endeavor to sympathy with them and solve their problems.

Conclusion
The authors insured that the basic and essential needs of rustics are as follows: investment on digging for obtaining drink water wells and reconstructing water rural networks, talking with land- owners about submitting their lands for essential needs such as houses, and Hospital, school, park, etc., as well as investment in tourism and conversation of natural source in rural areas.


