Background and Objective: Thyroid disorders, particularly hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism, are among the common clinical disorders occurring in most communities. The main aim of this study was to determine the  individual characteristics, common clinical signs and diet history in patients with hypo- or hyperthyroidism in different areas in Hamedan 

Materials and Methods: This study was a cross sectional retrospective study, which was conducted to investigate individual characteristics, common clinical signs and diet history in patients with hypo- or hyperthyroidism during 2003-2007 in Hamedan province. Statistical population in our study comprised patients with hypo- or hyperthyroidism referring to hospitals or care centers in different areas in Hamedan province during 2003-2007, and was documentary profiled. Individual questionnaire, clinical signs questionnaire, food frequency questionnaire and face to face interview were used to collect the data. The data was analyzed using t- or Chi-square tests to determine the association between variables and hypo- or hyperthyroidism in patients and to compare study subgroups. 

Results: The results showed that out of 1080 patients whom we studied, 63% were hypothyroid and 37% were hyperthyroid. The distribution of ABO blood group phenotype in hypo- or hyperthyroid patients was comparable to its normal distribution in the area. The frequency of hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism was higher in females than males (p < 0.001). History of familial marriage was observed in 38.5% or 18.39% of parents of hyperthyroid or hypothyroid patients, respectively. History of psychological problems was common in 41.25% of hyperthyroid and in 60.3% of hypothyroid patients and a history of negative life events was observed in 45.5% of hyperthyroid and in 64.4% of hypothyroid patients. There was lower consumption of meat and cereal food groups in patients than standard recommended orders (p < 0.01). 

Conclusion: Occurrence of hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism was more common in females than males. Genetic background, familial history, and psychological problems were among the important causes associated with hypo- or hyperthyroidism in patients in Hamedan.

