Abstract
The main objective of this study was to compare two test day models (with fixed or random regressions) applied for genetic evaluation of protein yield in Holsteins dairy cattle of Razavi Khorasan Province. The data set was included 57,551 protein test day records from 7036 first parity Holstein cows calved between 2003 and 2006. Total number of herds, sires, dams and animals in pedigree file were 138, 590, 6091 and 13117, respectively. Contemporary groups were defined based on combining herd-year-season of production-milking times (HYST). The response variable was test day protein yield for which there was an average 918 gr (SD=225.8 gr) in the whole data set. In fixed and random regression test day models, HYSM (fixed effect), calving age (linear and quadratic covariables), Holstein gene percentage (linear and quadratic covariables), and random effects of additive genetic and permanent environment were included. To take account of the shape of the lactation curve at phenotypic, genetic and environmental levels, orthogonal Legendre Polynomials were also included in the models so that the order of the Legendre fit was zero and third order for fixed and random regression test day models, respectively. Fixed and random regression test day models were run using WOMBAT and DXMRR software, respectively. The results indicated there was a very high rank correlation coefficient (0.936) between predicted breeding values (PBV) which was statistically significant (P < 0.001). Averages PBV of progeny were found to be -0.209 and -0.037 gr for fixed and random regression test day models, respectively which were not significantly different. The results also indicated that the highest (0.197) and the lowest (0.049) of heritability were found for the first and eighth month of the lactation course. It can therefore be concluded that fixed regression test day model could be used instead of random regression test day model in genetic evaluation of Iranian Holstein dairy cattle for protein test day records in particular where computational capacity is limited for running a random regression test day model at the national scale.

