Due to rapid global changes in the recent years, most life conditions have also changed. Accordingly, conditions that are affecting supply chains have also changed. Managers meet unknown conditions and new risks and it is necessary to prepare for efficient management. Today, supply chain risk management has gained considerable attention in academic and industrial environments. New concepts of supply chain vulnerability have been introduced in recent decades and several studies have been accomplished. However, most of them concentrated on a theoretical view of risk and vulnerability and only a few of them empirically investigated these concepts. All researchers believe that both concepts of risk and vulnerability are dependent on the context of study.  Because other research has been undertaken in countries which have completely different conditions in comparison with Iran (geographical, political, economical, etc), their results cannot be used in Iran, and this shows the necessity of undertaking such research in this area.
The main purpose of this research is to investigate the relationship between supply chain vulnerability and supply chain risk. In this paper, supply chain risks are studied in more detail. An appropriate classification for Iran automotive supply chain risks is introduced, and the literature is expanded by introducing five new drivers of vulnerability.  All of these were done by semi-structured interviews with specialists and also by considering the special conditions of Iran. 
After introducing risks and vulnerabilities, it is necessary to illustrate their relationship, because, in the practitioners’ point of view, it is difficult to distinguish between these concepts. The major objective of this research is the examination of the relationship between drivers of supply chain vulnerability and different types of supply chain risk. In other words, we can say that in this article, the main assumption is based on drivers of supply chain vulnerability, which lead to increased exposure to supply chain risk.  This assumption is examined through empirical study with a research survey in the Iran automotive supply chain and by conducting semi-structured interviews with specialists (academicians and practitioners). Finally, the result is validated by statistical methods.
Overall, the findings provide support for the hypothesis that supply chain characteristics or design variables (vulnerabilities drivers) influence exposure of the involved firms to the results of supply chain disruption. The results show that the drivers which are introduced in this article play a greater role in describing risk variance than others introduced in the literature. Totally, more than 30% of supply chain risks are explained by 10 drivers of supply chain vulnerabilities considered in this article. This shows that for supply chain risk management, managers should recognize their supply chain vulnerability drivers and manage them efficiently. Because these drivers play an important role in increasing exposure to risks, the efficient management of those drivers helps managers in making final decisions.


