Background and Objective: Investigation of the colloidal behaviour of protein-polysaccharide systems is becoming increasingly important to provide a foundation for their applications in areas such as production of biopolymer micro-and nano-particles, designing food analogues, and microencapsulation technology. The aim of the present study was to investigate the pH-induced critical transitions during associative phase separation between B-lactoglobulin (BLG) and tragacanthin (T).
Materials and Methods: The formation of electrostatic complexes in BLG/T dispersions (0.3wt.% total concentration; BLG:T ratio 2:1) was investigated as a function of pH (2.00-6.00) by spectrophotometry and particle size analysis. In addition, coupling of slow in situ acidification of the blend, with glucono-delta-lacton, and rheometry were used to monitor the structural transitions during the associative phase separation. The influence of salt type and concentration on the formation of micro-particles were also determined.
Results: The formation of soluble complexes started at pH ~5.20, and at pH ~4.85 the aggregation of intrapolymeric complexes occurred, followed by a bulk phase separation at pH ~4.30. The data indicated that coacervation occurred at pH 4.15. Finally, the mixture returned to a mono-phasic system at pH 2.5. Particle size analysis showed that the assembled structures experienced a contraction process upon complexation. Rheometry provided deeper insights into the colloidal behaviour of the system and the results were in good agreement with quiescent pH-induced transitions established by HCl titration. The formation of the micro-particles was strongly salt-dependent.
Conclusion: Under controlled pH conditions, electrostatic interactions between B-lactoglobulin and tragacanthin can be used to form a variety of biopolymer particles. These biopolymeric micro- and nano-particles may be used in the food industry as natural delivery systems or fat-replacers.
Keywords: B-Lactoglobulin, Tragacanthin, Protein-polysaccharide interactions, Associative phase separation, Biopolymer micro-particles

