Background and Objective: Due to low consumption of leguminous foods across populations, not much information is available on possible independent role of legumes in inflammation. The traditional Iranian diet provides an opportunity to investigate possible association between intake of legumes and health.  This study was carried out to determine the association between legume consumption and the serum levels of adhesion molecules and inflammatory biomarkers in Iranian women.
Materials and Methods: In this cross-sectional study, trained dietitians administered a validated semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) for assessment of usual dietary intakes in a sample of 486 Tehranian female- teachers aged 40-60 years selected by a multistage cluster random sampling method. Legumes in the FFQ included lentils, peas, chickpeas, different kinds of beans (broad beans, etc.), and chickling vetch. Blood samples were taken to measure the plasma concentrations of adhesion molecules and inflammatory biomarkers.
Results: After controlling for potential confounders, including dietary variables, as compared to women with the lowest legume intake, those with the highest legume intake had lower circulating levels of E-selectin (percent difference from bottom quintile (?14.1%, p-trend=0.04), soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1) (?20.3%, p-trend < 0.01), and soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) (?15.6%, p-trend=0.01). Subjects in the top tertile of legume intake had lower serum levels of high sensitive C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), TNF-? and interleukin-6 (IL-6) as compared to those in the lowest tertile, even after controlling for potential confounders and dietary variables. No significant association was found between legume intake and serum amyloid A levels.
Conclusion: High legume consumption is associated with low circulating levels of adhesion molecules and inflammatory biomarkers among Iranian women.
Keywords: Legume, Inflammation, Endothelial function, Adhesion molecules, Women

