Backgrounds and Objective; Existence of suitable leadership style helps correct performance of nurses who are the most specialized personnel in hospital and performance improvement results in the development of quality and reliability of the supervision and makes them responsible for their performance. This study was carried out to determine the effect of servant leadership style on the nurses’ performance.
Materials and Methods: Materials a methods: the current research is a correlation study which was conducted in tonekabon and ramsar hospitals. Subjects of this study were nurses of these two hospitals who met the requirements of the characteristics of research samples and ware randomly selected. In this study first the nurses’ leadership style was examined regarding the adaptation rate with the servant leadership indexes. Then, its effete on the nurses’ performance was determined. In this way, after distributing the questionnaire for determining servant leaders, 10 subjects were assigned to each of these two groups, one observing servant leadership style, and the other non servant leadership one, to homogenize subjects, 150 nurses (75 in experimental group, 75 in control group) responded the questionnaires. First, the degree of demographics variables was determined by the use of descriptive statics and annual evaluation used for determining nurses’ performances. Then independent t-test was used for comparing the score of the two groups, and independent t-test and ANOVA were used for determining the effect of demographic characteristics of head nurses on the servant leadership style.
Results: Data analysis by means of independent t-test showed significant difference at the mean of nurses annual performance evaluation score in the two experimental and control groups (p < 0.05). Nurses annual evaluation score mean obtained using independent t-test by considering their gender (p=0.31) marital status (P=0.17), educational degree (p=0.44) wasn’t significant. Further more, ANOVA test didn’t show any significant difference between nurses annual performance evaluation scare in fourfold age groups and fourfold groups of service yours (P=0.59). ANOVA test also showed that servant leadership style had great effect on the nurses performance (P=0.01). These results are applied to each of performance parameters.
Conclusion: considering the importance of servant leadership style in hospitals, the head nurses who particularly make use of the results of this study for managing the respective ward can be successful and this is possible through teaching them the most effective methods.

