ABSTRACT: Adjusting the affective and emotional relationship with the subjects is a complicated issue and one of the internal concerns of the managers. The employees who have a relative awareness and stability are inclined to expand their relationship with the organization and their employers and that's how they turn into loyal and committed employees using this process.In terms of importance, the loyalty of the employees is seen as a remarkable component for gaining the satisfaction and loyalty of the clients in governmental organizations and the success of public service organizations. Research has shown that the emotional relationship of the employees has a positive impact on the loyalty viewpoints of the clients in governmental organizations. The present research investigates the inclination to emotional relationship among the employees from three different aspects (emotional, calculative and normative) and explores the relationship between these three aspects with some loyal behaviors of the employees including oral loyalty (verbal), the intention to stay in the organization, insensitivity toward the benefits and complaints, finally assessing this relationship based on a premeditated conceptual model and its impact on four behavioral components in the loyalty of the employees. Our population consists of the managers and employees of the Institute of Standards and Industrial Research of Iran and since the technique of structural equations has been used, the methodology is causative and based on applied objective. Moreover, for the hypothesis test, we have used the LISREL statistical software. The results of the research suggest that inclination to relationship has a positive effect on the emotional and normative commitment of the employees, but does not have any relationship on calculated commitment. Moreover, there's no relationship between the calculated commitment and oral advertisement for the organization, intention to stay, insensitivity to benefits and complaints. Furthermore, there's no relationship between emotional commitment and intention to stay in the organization, insensitivity to benefits and complaints; it only has a positive relationship with loyalty. However, there isn't a positive relationship between normative commitment and oral advertisement for the organization, intention to stay, insensitivity to benefits and complaints.
