Background & Objective: Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) is defined with two of the following items: Fever or hypothermia, tachypnea, tachycardia and leukocytosis or leukopenia or bandemia. Sepsis is SIRS with an infectious etiology. Severe sepsis is sepsis plus associated hypoxemia and insufficiency of tissue perfusion or hypotension. Septic shock is severe sepsis without response to adequate fluid therapy. In this article we study abovementioned parameters.
Materials & Methods:  The first physical Exam, presentation, past history and familial history were determined. Vital sign and SIRS factors, Diagnosis interventions and paraclinical labs and final diagnosis were   recorded. The cause of   SIRS, sepsis, severe sepsis was enrolled in the questionnaire with close monitoring and observation from admission till final diagnosis. 
Results:  In Admitted patients 60.86% were male and 39.14% were female median respiratory rate, pulse rate, white blood cell was 28.24, 102.31 and 11597 respectively.  Diabetes mellitus 9.3%, Intravenous drug abuse, (5.5%), malignancy (5.2%), and trauma ( 3.8%) were the most important predisposing disease. The most frequent etiology was pneumonia 17.2%, meningitis 10%, cellulitis 4.8% and endocarditis 4.5%.   The most frequent etiology of SIRS without infection was drug reaction, and the most frequent cause of sepsis, severe sepsis and septic shock were pneumonia and meningitis pneumonia, pneumonia and gastroenteritis respectively. There was no significant relation between age and type of etiology and mortality. Rate of Mortality in sepsis and severe sepsis were 4.5%-9.9% – 7.8% respectively.  
Conclusion:  According to the results of this study the most frequent etiology of sepsis, severe sepsis and septic shock were pneumonia, meningitis, pneumonia, pneumonia and gastroenteritis respectively. The rate of mortality in septic shock patients was zero. We recommend attention to respiratory infections and predisposing disease like diabetes and training and education of students 

