
Introduction: Depression is a debilitating condition and is one of the most common and serious disorders that threaten human physical and psychcological health that places an enormous burden on society an important component of the economic impact of depression is lost productivity in the workplace. Considering nurses role in health system and necessary for high motivation in work place to health security about this grand group and referral persons to them, we accomplished this research to studding of mental health nursing staff in educational hospitals affiliated to Kurdistan medical sciences university. The objective of this study was survey and Comparison of Depression prevalence between shift work nurses in education hospitals of Kurdistan medical science university.
Methods: The study was carried out using a descriptive-analytic method the population under study included 380 nurses from beasat, tohid and gods hospital in sanandaj city. 314 nurses (219 femal and 95 male) were evaluated (between January 2009 to may 2009) by census method. Data were gathered through the questionnaires containing demographic information and the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Statistical was done by chi-score and t-test using spss win software.
Results: In this study 42% of the total samples were not depressed and depression rate of mild, moderate and severe type were 37.3%, 15.9% and 7.4% respectively. Prevalence of depression in Major depression in night shift nurses was 5.6% and in daily shift nurses was 3.4%. The mean value of depression in daily shift samples was not significantly different from that of night shift samples. There was not significant correlation between depression and demographic characteristics such as age, gender, marital status, job history and educational level. But relationship between depression and job position was significant (P=0.01).
Conclusion: Nurses mental health to several causes toward other community people exposed to risk. Our results show a high prevalence depression in nurses. So, paying more attention to shift work nurses' health, particularly female nurses, through shift work education program, occupational health consulation and periodical examinations is recommended.

