The Application, Validity and Reliability of Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) for evaluation of carrying and transferring injured ones in Kermanshah Paramedics' Faculty Emergency Medical Students in 2011

Corresponding author: Reza Pour Mirza Kalhori, MS in Nursing, Department of Emergency Medicine, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran 
Email: rpourmirza@ymail.com

Bijan Sabour, MS in Nursing, Department of Emergency Medicine, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran
Arsalan Naderipour, MS in Nursing, Department of Emergency Medicine, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran
Dr. Mansour Rezaei, PhD in Biostatistics, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran

Received: 2012-01-30             Accepted: 2012-07-10

Abstract
Introduction:
Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) is used for learning evaluation in medical sciences. This study was conducted in order to investigate the application, validity and reliability of OSCE in carrying and transferring injured ones in Emergency Medical Students in Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences in 2011.

Methods:
In this descriptive-correlation study, data was collected by using checklists of behavior control and multiple-choice questions in each station by examiners; also it was analyzed with SPSS-16. It was used of the methods of criterion related and construct and also internal Cronbach’s coefficient in order to assess validity and reliability respectively. The census method was used due to the small population, 32 students in the third semester were participated in 8 stations. Data was analyzed by spss-16.

Findings: 
The results of this study were as follows: OSCE mean scores were 28.31 (±8.81); criterion related validity of stations with mid-term exam was 0.58; and the correlation coefficient with final theory exam was 0.69 (P < 0.001); construct validity between internal consistency of OSCE scores and total scores were significant in the eight station (r=0.63); reliability of OSCE with Cronbach’s coefficient was r=0.53.

Conclusion:
According to this study, OSCE was a suitable tool with acceptable criterion related and construct validity for evaluation the course of carrying and transferring injured ones in Emergency Medical Students. In this study, the reliability was moderate and needed to be improved with scientific educational methods.

Keywords: validity, reliability, Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE)

