Medical education is a new discipline which
started about 50 years ago. The pioneer of this
discipline was George Miller from the University
of Chicago who suggested most of prominent
medical professionals have little or no knowledge of
psychology of learning and advocated the validity of
present medical education in the world.
He hypothesized that while very eminent and well
trained scientific oriented medical teachers were very
well qualified in their prospective field of medicine,
they were not well aware, nor utilized the psychology
of learning. Therefore, their effort in training medical
students was partially wasted. He emphasized the
goal oriented learning and suggested that we, as
academic teachers of medical sciences, must switch
our emphasis from teaching to learning. He also
proposed that every teacher of medicine” clearing
the objective and every course in medicine” it was
the further the fact that the objective should be in the
form of “behavioral objective” and emphasized that
this objective should be well spelled out and clearly
defined and written in advance.
Fortunately, one of our academicians, Dr. Bahman
Joorabchi, who was in Chicago gets in touch with
Dr. Miller and soon became the pioneer of medical
education after his return to Shiraz Medical School.
In early 1970’s the Department of Medical Education
was established in Shiraz Medical School. A number
of workshops were carried out by Dr. Joorabchi
for professors of clinical and basic sciences. Also a
number of professors from different disciplines, from
both clinical and basic sciences, were sent to Chicago
to get up-to-date in medical education. On return,
they themselves became the instructor and facilitator
of these workshops.
These workshops were so successful that soon entire
medical schools of Iran became interested and invited
the Shiraz group to carry on these workshops all over
the country.
The World Health Organization noted the
great success of this department and soon Shiraz
became the World Health Organization Center for
medical education for the entire region of Eastern
Mediterranean.
In early 2011, based on the demand of participants
of these workshops, we started planning a publication.
We hope that all interested individuals as well as
former scholars of this department collaborate with
us to achieve our mission. We are looking forward to
all constructive suggestions and criticism. The young
and enthusiastic staff of this department are keen to
receive your correspondence and emails.
