Introduction & Objective: This cross-sectional study was undertaken to assess the association between dietary energy density and prevalence of the cardiometabolic risk factors among Te-hranian adult women.
Materials & Methods: In this cross-sectional study we assessed habitual dietary intakes of 486 Tehranian adult women by the use of a validated food frequency questionnaire. Dietary en-ergy density (DED) was calculated as each individual’s reported daily energy intake (kcal/d) into total weight of foods (excluding beverages) consumed (g/d). Fasting plasma glucose (FPG), lipid profiles and blood pressure were measured. Diabetes (FPG? 126 mg/dL), dyslip-idemia (based on Adult Treatment Panel III) and hypertension (based on Joint National Committee VI) were defined. The presence of “at least one risk factor” and "at least two risk factors" of the three major risk factors for cardiovascular disease (hypertension, dyslipidemia and diabetes) were also evaluated. To explore the associations between DED and cardio-metabolic risk factors, we obtained prevalence ratios in different models accounting for con-founders.
Results: Mean dietary energy density was 1.77±0.35 kcal/g. Consumption of energy-dense diets was associated with higher intakes of energy, dietary fat, cholesterol, vegetable oils, refined grains and high-fat dairy products and lower intakes of dietary carbohydrates, fruits, vegetables , meat and fish. Adherence to an energy-dense diet was associated with elevated levels of serum triglycerides, total- and LDL-cholesterol and lower levels of serum HDL-cholesterol. Women in the top quartile of DED were more likely to have dyslipidemia (61% vs. 31%, P < 0.05), at least one (68% vs. 35%, P < 0.05) and at least two (29% vs. 10%, P < 0.05) cardiometabolic risk factors as compared with those in the bottom quartile. Addi-tional control for BMI slightly attenuated the associations. No overall significant associations were found between consumption of energy-dense diets and risk of having diabetes or hyper-tension either before or after adjustment for confounders.
Conclusion: Consumption of energy-dense diets was significantly related to the high prevalence of dyslipidemia, at least one and at least two risk factors among Tehranian adult women. Pro-spective studies are required to confirm our findings.
(Sci J Hamadan Univ Med Sci 2013; 20 (1):38-48)
