Dark cells of zona fasciculata and reticularis in adrenal cortex of sheep are very similar to apoptotic cells and it seems; they have been obtained from clear cells in that region. The main objective of this study was to differentiate the dark cells of adrenal cortex from apoptotic clear cells following experimental induction of apoptosis using dexamethasone in sheep. In this study, 16 healthy male Ghezel sheep with approximate age of 8-11 months were randomly divided equally into control and treatment groups. The treatment group was injected with dexamethasone, daily for 2 weeks at a dose of 0.4 mg/kg B.W., intramuscularly and the control group was treated with normal saline in the same manner. After 4 hours from the last injection, both experimental groups were euthanized and tissue specimens were collected from their adrenals and 5 ?m thick microscopic sections were prepared through H&E staining and TUNEL method for apoptotic index. To ascertain the effects of dexamethasone on adrenal gland in the trial group, the proportion of cortical region to whole of the gland was assessed in both experimental groups. TUNEL positive cells were identified, counted and analyzed under the light microscope. Thin sections were also prepared for assessing by transmission electron microscope. Microscopically, thickness of adrenal cortex in treatment group was significantly lesser than control group (P < 0.05). The mean number of apoptotic cells in this region relating to the treatment group which were dark-brown in appearance, was significantly more than those in the control group (P < 0.05). In electron microscopy, TUNEL positive cells from treatment group had typical morphologic characteristics of apoptosis as severe nuclear shrinkage, clumping, deep condensation and segmentation of chromatin. However, dark cells of control group lacking those qualifications and they had only irregular and high electron dense nucleus. The findings of the present study revealed that the dark cells of zona fasciculata and reticularis in adrenal cortex of sheep are not the same apoptotic clear cells of adrenal cortex.
