Nowadays crimes and social deviations have strikingly grown in parallel with progress and development in different economic and social dimensions, expansion of cities, reduction in family roles of social and cultural acceptability and moral and religious values. On this basis, human societies intend to control crimes and deviations by establishing and reinforcing many official and supervisory institutions and organizations. Regarding the destructive role of crimes and deviations in annihilation of human personality and social disorder in the past decades, social scientists have viewed religion and religious beliefs as a factor of internal supervision and individuals’ and society’s immunity from deviation and have dealt with its reformist performances. According to the subjects mentioned above, in this research, the relation between piety and the amount of tendency to crimes and social deviations is considered. The main objective of this article is to examine the correlation of these two variables and to study the effect of piety on crime prevention. 
This research is a survey study and questionnaire together with interview have been used as the means of data collection. The population is all the citizens (in active age) of Kashan in the year 1389 from which 421 people have been selected and examined by use of Kokaran formula. Validity of the research’s variables’ assessment scales have been examined by Kronboch alpha coefficient and according to Kronboch’s test results, the validity of the spectrum of the amount of piety by (a=0.82) and the amount of criminal tendency by (a=0,78) have been confirmed. The research’s findings confirm the relation between the above variables. The Spearman correlation coefficient (r?=-0/353) in a reliability level of 99 per cent confirms the meaningful relation of the mentioned variables. There is a negative relation which shows that the more the amount of piety, the less the amount of tendency towards crime. Also, the results of regression equivalent indicate that the most influence of the factors in reducing the tendency towards crime is doing religious teachings and moralities.

