The objective of the research is to quantify the relative contributions of physical and chemical mass transfer to the movement of Co(II/III)EDTA (chelates of Cobalt and Ethylene Diamine Tetraacetic Acid or EDTA) through a limestone–shale saprolite soil. Saprolite is a collective term referring to partially-weathered bedrock. It exists extensively in the subsurface. Because the parent bedding structures are maintained during the weathering process, saprolite soils are characterized by intensive fractures and secondary deposits of minerals such as Al-, Fe- and Mn-oxides on the fracture surfaces. Movement of reactive species through the soils may be influenced by diffusion into the rock matrix, a physical mass transfer (PMT) process, and interfacial chemical reactions, a chemical mass transfer (CMT) process. The PMT and CMT processes are phenomenologically similar but mechanistically different. In this research, previous laboratory observations from a Br and Co(II)EDTA tracer injection into an undisturbed saprolite soil column were used. Mechanistic reactive transport models were formulated to quantify the PMT and CMT processes. The PMT process was independently characterized by using the non-reactive tracer Br. Model parameters thus obtained were subsequently used as constraints to quantify the CMT processes involving Co(II)EDTA and its oxidation product Co(III)EDTA. Our calculations indicated that the PMT rates of the less reactive Co(III)EDTA were comparable with their theoretical CMT rates. In contrast, for the more reactive species Co(II)EDTA, CMT rates are higher than PMT rates. Evaluations of alternative CMT process models further confirmed one of our hypotheses on the basis of previous experimental understandings. The hypothesis suggested that competition from Fe-oxide for Co(II)EDTA may account for the majority of the decrease of Co(III)EDTA effluent concentrations that resulted in the separation of total Co and Co(III)EDTA breakthrough curves. Because Co(III)EDTA is more mobile than Co(II)EDTA in the subsurface, the results of this research suggest independent quantifications of CoEDTA PMT and CMT processes if laboratory results are to be interpreted correctly and scaled up for field and predictive uses.
