Introduction: Coronary artery diseases are the primary and most common cause of death in all ages. Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) surgery as a common treatment intervention is considered necessary in patients with coronary artery disease. Complications may occur during and after (CABG) surgery. Among major complications are hemodynamic changes after surgery which is still an important matter.  
Objective: The aim of this study is to determine level of hemodynamic changes after coronary ar-tery bypass grafting and its related factors in patients undergoing CABG admitted to post cardiac intensive care unit and the effect of related factors on severity and weakness of complications. 
Methods: In this descriptive cross – sectional study, 288 (CABG) patients who had coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) and admitted to the post cardiac intensive care unit in Dr. Heshmat educa-tional-therapeutic hospital in Rasht were selected by sequential sampling method and studied using questionnaire. Statistical analysis performed with appropriate tests chi square test, fisher exact test and logistic regression and correlations between dependent and independent variables were identi-fied.
Results: According to the research findings, 36% of patients after surgery had systolic blood pres-sure changes out of normal range, 49% had diastolic blood pressure changes, 65% heart beat chang-es, and 34% had central venous pressure changes out of normal limits. A significant relationship was observed between interfering factors such as Body Mass Index, ejection fraction, history of Myocardial- infraction, number of grafts, duration of the connection to ventilator, duration of cardi-opulmonary machine use, duration of aorta clamp, hypothermia, and level of hemoglobin and hema-tocrit with hemodynamic variables. 
Conclusion: The research findings may be considered in planning for prevention, diagnosis and early treatment of any possible complications, consequently the quality of care for CABG patient will improve.

