Creative Problem Solving (CPS), a well-documented methodology
for developing creative-thinking skills, has often been
the focus of studies that have examined the impact of creativity
training. The purpose of the present study was to extend
this line of research in two ways. The first objective was to evaluate
participants’ reactions to specific elements of a CPS course.
Here participants were asked to rate the CPS components,
stages, principles, and tools for enjoyment and future value.
The second objective was to examine whether participants’
reactions to the CPS training varied in accordance to their cognitive
style preferences. The inventory used to measure cognitive
style is called FourSight. FourSight identifies respondents’
preferences in terms of four key elements of the creative process:
problem identification (i.e., Clarifier), idea generation (i.e.,
Ideator), solution development (i.e., Developer), and implementation
(i.e., Implementer). Eighty-four participants were enrolled
in various graduate and undergraduate courses in CPS. Participants
completed FourSight at the beginning of their respective
course and at the conclusion they responded to a survey
in which they evaluated various aspects of CPS for enjoyment
and value. Overall evaluation of the CPS courses indicated that
participants associated the greatest enjoyment and future value
with tools, principles, and stages that were primarily orientated
towards divergent thinking. Analysis of participants’ reactions
in light of their FourSight preferences revealed two distinct
types of reactions to the course content. One form of response
was labeled true-to-type, for example, individuals who expressed
high Clarifier preferences found learning the Gather
Data stage of CPS to be more enjoyable than those with lowClarifier preferences. The second type of reaction was referred
to as a complementary relationship. This type of relationship
between the course and the participant’s style seemed to indicate
a desire to develop a skill that is perhaps outside of one’s
style preference. For example, participants with strong Ideator
preferences were more likely to associate higher levels of
future value with the Prepare for Action component of the
CPS process. The implications of these and other findings are
discussed
