OBJECTIVE: Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) usually is indicated if the patient’s malignant disease involves the marrow or if hazard to the normal marrow is the limiting factor in the aggressive treatment of disease. The success of BMT depends on a complete team with all the resources needed to ensure optimal results. Aggressive nutrition support after BMT is very important. Adequate parenteral nutrition, total (TPN) or partial, followed by enteral nutrition according to the patient’s gastrointestinal function is the important principle.

METHODS: Between 1996 and 2000, 60 patients, 46 male and 14 female, received BMT in Chang Gung Memorial Hospital. Their ages ranged from 6 to 54 y. Standard TPN was used in 40 patients after BMT, and partial parenteral nutrition was used in the remaining 20 patients. TPN was enriched with branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) when the patient’s liver functions were impaired, and cyclic TPN was shifted when the patient’s liver functions persistently deteriorated.

RESULTS: Most patients improved their nutrition status and increased their body weights, especially those receiving TPN. The patients receiving partial parenteral nutrition decreased their visceral proteins significantly during the course of parenteral nutrition. The BCAA-TPN can maintain a patient’s visceral protein better than standard TPN. Only two patients expired because of graft rejection and sepsis; their body weights and nutrition status showed deterioration despite aggressive nutrition support.

CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the nutrition support for patients with BMT is related to the success of marrow transplantation. Parenteral nutrition support, especially with TPN, is important because of frequent gastrointestinal dysfunction during the posttransplantational period, and it is better at maintaining the nutrition status and body weights of patients after BMT. An oral diet can be resumed after the patient’s gastrointestinal function has improved and it can be tolerated.
