Objective
We assessed the clinical effectiveness of postoperative enteral stimulation by gut feeding in patients with severe acute pancreatitis (SAP).
Methods
Medical records of 63 patients who were operated on within the past 4 y due to deterioration of SAP were included in this retrospective study. Patients were stratified in gut feeding (GF; n = 33) and standard therapy (ST; n = 30) groups according to the postoperative therapy provided. The GF group received postoperative standard therapy and enteral stimulation by gut feeding, and the ST group received standard therapy only. The Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II score, incidence of the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS), daily calories supply, complication rate, and outcomes were analyzed.
Results
Patient characteristics did not differ between groups when considering age and severity of the disease. All patients underwent similar surgical interventions. SIRS and MODS were observed initially with the same frequency in both groups. Regression of MODS and a lower postoperative complication rate was observed more often in the GF group. Development of early pulmonary complications was observed in 12.1% to 13.3% in both groups, irrespective of the time of surgery. Subsequently, pulmonary complications developed in 15.2% of GF patients compared with 43.3% of ST patients (P <0.05). Acute renal insufficiency developed similarly in 33.3% of the GF patients and in 26.7% of the ST patients within 3 d after admission. Acute renal insufficiency developed later on only in the ST group (26.7%, P <0.05). Wound- and catheter-related septic complications were considerably more frequent in the ST group (30.0%) than in the GF group (9.1%, P <0.05). Intensive care and hospital stays did not differ. Postoperative gut feeding was associated with 6.1% mortality in the GF compared with 26.7% in the ST (P <0.05).
Conclusions
Enteral stimulation by gut feeding is an effective supplement in the postoperative therapy of patients with SAP.

