Objective
We compared the effects of diets based on soybean protein and casein supplemented or not supplemented with 0.1% cholesterol on plasma lipoprotein lipid amounts and their fatty acid compositions, lecithin:cholesterol acyl-transferase activity, and lipid peroxidation.
Methods

The composition and concentration of lipid and apolipoprotein in different lipoprotein classes, plasma LCAT activity, and lipid peroxidation were determined in rats fed 20% highly purified soybean protein or casein with or without 0.1% cholesterol for 2 mo.
Results

Soybean protein and casein diets with or without cholesterol had similar plasma total cholesterol concentrations. Soybean protein consumption diminished very low-density lipoprotein particle number, as measured by diminished contents of very low-density lipoprotein triacylglycerol, phospholipid, and apolipoprotein-B100. Lecithin:cholesterol acyl-transferase activity was not significantly modified by either protein. The soybean protein diet decreased the linoleate desaturation index (20:4[ω-6]/18:2[ω-6]) in liver and high-density lipoprotein fraction 2–3-phospholipids but enhanced red blood cell resistance against free radical attack. Addition of cholesterol to both protein diets decreased concentrations of high-density lipoprotein fraction 2–3 cholesterol. Lecithin:cholesterol acyl-transferase activity tended to be greater after cholesterol feeding, likely due to the enhanced high-density lipoprotein fraction 2–3 apolipoprotein-AI, a cofactor activator for lecithin:cholesterol acyl-transferase. Regardless of dietary protein source, cholesterol supplementation decreased the linoleate desaturation index in liver and plasma lipoprotein lipids and red blood cell resistance to free radical attack.
Conclusions

Our results suggest that the dietary protein origin affects lipid peroxidation and polyunsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis and distribution among liver and different lipoprotein lipid classes, but plays only a minor role in the regulation of plasma and lipoprotein cholesterol concentrations. Providing dietary cholesterol (0.1%) with casein or soybean protein attenuates the effects of these proteins, with the exception of plasma cholesterol.
