Objective
Studies that link adolescence pregnancies, nutritional status, and birth outcomes in Tanzania are scarce. We examined the nutritional status and birthoutcomes of pregnant adolescent girls from rural and urban areas of three regions in Tanzania.
Methods

The study was carried out in the regions of Dar es Salaam (Chamazi and Gezaulole dispensaries and Round Table Maternity Home), Coast (Tumbi Regional Hospital and Mlandizi Health Center), and Morogoro (Regional Hospital, Uhuru Clinic, and Mlali Health Center). One hundred eighty pregnant adolescent girls ages 15 to 19 y were recruited and interviewed, and their nutritional status measurements were taken at the seven health facilities. Information concerning date of birth, marital status, educational status, sex education, and income status was collected with a structured questionnaire. Height, weight, and mid-upper arm circumference were measured according to standard techniques. Hemoglobin concentration was measured with a hemoglobinometer and the HemoCue technique. Nutritional status was assessed by body mass index, and hemoglobin concentration was determined by cutoff points of the World Health Organization. Suitable statistical analysis was done with SPSS 9.0. Weekly weight gain during pregnancy was measured in 123 subjects who kept their appointments and reported back after 2 wk. Fifty-seven subjects did not keep their appointments and were lost to follow-up. Records of infants' birth weights and mode of delivery were obtained from 50 subjects whodelivered at the study sites.
Results

The height ofabout 54% of the subjects was shorter than 151 cm, suggestive ofshort maternal height. Severe wasting was observed in 27% ofsubjects. Mean weekly weight gain during pregnancy was 317 ±110 g (−500 to 500 g). No significantdifferences were observed between rural and urban settings. Mean infantbirth weight was 2600 ± 480 g. About 48% ofinfants had low birth weight (<2500 g) and only 14% ofinfants had birth weight greater than 3000 g. About14% of infants were born by cesarean section. Nearly 86%of the pregnant adolescent girls were anemic. A hemoglobinconcentration below 7 g/dL was observed in 5% of subjects. Mostsubjects (55%) had hemoglobin concentrations from 7 to lowerthan 10 g/dL. There was a weak correlation between infant birth weightand weekly weight gain of the girls during pregnancy(r = 0.36, P≤ 0.01). However, a strong correlation was observed betweenbirth weight and hemoglobin level of adolescent girls during pregnancy(r = 0.67, P= 0.01). Short stature was observed to contribute towardcesarean delivery (P = 0.05) becausemore cesarean deliveries were performed in short girls (<151 cmtall).
Conclusions

The nutritional status ofpregnant adolescent girls in the study areas was poor and resulted inpoor pregnancy outcome. Girls should be educated about reproductivehealth at the primary level ofeducation.
