Objective
Dietary restraint, disinhibition, and perceived hunger have been shown to affect food intake and body weight and are thought to be risk factors for eating disorders, but little is known about their origins. We investigated the influence of heredity, shared (familial) environment, and individual environment on dietary restraint disinhibition, perceived hunger and their relation to body size and food intake.
Methods

Scores on the Three Factor Eating Questionnaire and the Restraint Scale in addition to height, weight, body mass index, and 7-d diary reported nutrient intakes were obtained from 39 identical, 60 fraternal same-sex, and 50 fraternal opposite-sex adult twin pairs who were living independently. Linear structural modeling was applied to investigate the nature and degree of genetic and environmental influences.
Results

Analysis showed significant genetic and individual environmental, but not shared (familial) environmental, influences on cognitive restraint, perceived hunger, and Restraint Scale scores, with genes accounting for 44%, 24%, and 58% of the variance, respectively. In contrast, disinhibition was found to be significantly influenced by the shared (familial) environment, accounting for 40% of the variance. Further analysis showed that cognitive restraint and perceived hunger heritabilities could not be accounted for by significant heritabilities of body weight, height, or body mass index. In contrast, the heritability of Restraint Scale scores was found to be related to body size. Cognitive restraint was negatively correlated with nutrient intake, and differences in cognitive restraint were found to be related to differences in the body sizes of identical twin pairs.
Conclusions

Dietary restraint appears to be another component in a package of genetically determined physiologic, sociocultural, and psychological processes that regulate energy balance, whereas dietary disinhibition may be the intermediary between upbringing and the development of overweight and/or eating disorders.
