Objective
Larger doses of fructose and saturated fat have been associated with oxidative stress and development of hypertension. The effects of modest amounts of fructose and saturated fatty acids on oxidative stress are unknown.
Methods

To increase knowledge on this question, 10-wk-old spontaneously hypertensive rats and Wistar rats were fed for 8 wk with a control diet or an experimental diet enriched with fructose (18%) and saturated fatty acids (11%; FS diet). The total antioxidant status of organs and red blood cells was assayed by monitoring the rate of free radical-induced red blood cell hemolysis. Sensitivity of very low-density lipoprotein and low-density lipoprotein (VLDL-LDL) to copper-induced lipid peroxidation was determined as the production of thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances. Antioxidant enzymes and vitamins were also measured to establish the oxidative stress effect.
Results

The FS diet did not affect blood pressure in either strain, but it increased plasma insulin concentrations only in Wistar rats without affecting those of glucose of either strain. The FS diet significantly enhanced plasma and VLDL-LDL triacylglycerol concentrations without affecting concentrations of VLDL-LDL thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances. The decreased content of arachidonic acid and total polyunsaturated fatty acids in VLDL-LDL by the FS diet may have prevented lipid peroxidation in this fraction. Moreover, FS consumption by both strains was accompanied by a significant increase in total antioxidant capacity of adipose tissue, muscle, heart, and liver. This may have resulted from increased tissue ascorbic acid levels and glutathione peroxidase and glutathione reductase activities in tissues.
Conclusions

These findings clearly indicate that the FS diet did not alter blood pressure of spontaneously hypertensive rats and Wistar rats. The FS diet resulted in hypertriglyceridemia but increased the total antioxidant status, which may prevent lipid peroxidation in these rats.
