Preventive action of green tea from changes in the liver antioxidant abilities of different aged rats intoxicated with ethanol  Original Research Article
Pages 925-932
Agnieszka Augustyniak, Ewa Waszkiewicz, Elżbieta Skrzydlewska
Close Close preview  |   Purchase PDF (115 K)   |   Related articles  |  Related reference work articles
AbstractAbstract | Figures/TablesFigures/Tables | ReferencesReferences
Abstract
Objective
The present study investigated the influence of green tea as a source of water-soluble antioxidants on the liver antioxidant potential of different aged rats chronically intoxicated with ethanol.
Methods

Rats (2, 12, and 24 mo old) were fed for 5 wk on a control or an ethanol Lieber-DeCarli diet with and without green tea (7 g/L). The activity and level of enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants and the level of markers of protein and lipid oxidation in the liver of rats were examined.
Results

The activities of superoxide dismutase and catalase and levels of vitamins C, E, A, and β-carotene were significantly decreased, whereas activities of glutathione peroxidase and glutathione reductase and the level of reduced glutathione significantly increased during aging. The ethanol diet caused a significant decrease in activity of antioxidant enzymes and in the level of non-enzymatic antioxidants tested. Administration of green tea to ethanol-treated rats of different ages partly normalized the activity of enzymes and the level of non-enzymatic antioxidants. Changes in antioxidant ability observed during aging were accompanied by increased levels of markers of lipid and protein modifications that also were intensified by ethanol. Green tea caused a decrease in lipid and protein oxidation in aged and ethanol-treated rats. The protective effect of green tea was confirmed by the significantly lower activity of biomarkers of liver damage (alanine and aspartate aminotransferases) in the serum of rats that received green tea with ethanol compared with rats from the control ethanol group.
Conclusions

The use of green tea appears to be beneficial to rat liver by decreasing oxidative stress caused by ethanol and/or aging.
Article Outline

Introduction
Materials and methods

Chemicals and reagents
Statistical analysis

Results
Discussion
Acknowledgements
References


