Iron status in Swedish teenage girls: impact of low dietary iron bioavailability  Original Research Article
Pages 638-645
Michael Hoppe, Agneta Sjöberg, Leif Hallberg, Lena Hulthén
Close Close preview  |   Purchase PDF (124 K)   |   Related articles  |  Related reference work articles
AbstractAbstract | Figures/TablesFigures/Tables | ReferencesReferences
Abstract
Objective
Although it is well known that bioavailability of iron in the diet is important, it has not been fully elucidated in practice. We investigated iron intake and iron absorption in the ordinary diet of free-living individuals in relation to iron status and assessed iron requirements.
Methods

From a total of 1245 adolescent boys and girls included in the Göteborg Adolescence Study of food habits, 28 adolescent girls registered their food intake during 7 d. Iron intake was assessed on the basis of these 7-d dietary records. Iron absorption was calculated using an algorithm including enhancing and inhibiting dietary factors on iron absorption in relation to individual iron status.
Results

Available iron intake was 11.5 ± 2.8 mg/d (mean ± SD). The proportion of girls with an iron intake below the Nordic nutrition recommendations was 85% (n = 24). Calculated iron absorption was 1.09 ± 0.59 mg/d (mean ± SD). Only four girls satisfied their estimated individual iron requirement concerning the absorbed amount of iron. Iron depletion (serum ferritin concentration ≤15 μg/L) was present in 10 girls (36%), 2 of whom were also anemic (hemoglobin concentration ≤120 g/L).
Conclusion

Swedish adolescent girls seemed to have difficulties satisfying their iron requirement in terms of absorbed amount. The data support the view that iron intake and bioavailability of dietary iron is important when evaluating whether iron requirements have been met.
Article Outline

Introduction
Materials and methods

Participants
Dietary intake
Meals
Anthropometric and laboratory measurements
Menstrual blood loss assessment
Iron requirement: ingested amount
Iron requirement: absorbed amount
Iron absorption: method used
Adjusting non-heme iron absorption for iron status
Algorithm validity range
Iron fortification
Statistics

Results

Anthropometry, assessed iron requirements, and laboratory measurements
Energy intake
Iron intake
Iron absorption
Correlations

Discussion

Validity of the dietary assessment
Representability
Need for iron in adolescence
Bioavailability of iron and prevalence of iron deficiency
Methodologic considerations

Conclusion
References


