Current study has been carried out in order to investigate teachers' job motivation regarding managers' leadership style in the girls' high-school in the educational year (1386-1387) in Urmia city.
	The second method regarding the objective is practical, and descriptive and correlative in nature. In order to collect the data, three realized questionnaires including job motivation with thirty clothed answer questions, a followers' maturity one with ten closed answer, and finally a leadership style questionnaire with twenty closed answer questions were used. Content based validity is used to determine the validity of the questionnaire. Based on scientific texts and theories, they were regulated and delivered to experts on education, adviser and consultant professor. Obtaining their approval the questionnaires were conducted. Concerning the reliability of the questionnaires Cornbach's Alfa test was utilized.
	The statistical population included all the managers (27), teachers (623) people. Statistical sample size was 27 managers and 135 teachers which randomly selected. To test the normal distribution of variables Kolmogorov-Smirnov was conducted. Through descriptive and inferential statistics the collected data were analyzed. In order to test hypothesis and answer the t\research questions, parametric and non-parametric tests including: t-test, variance analysis, chi-square test, and person correlation were used. For analyzing the data SPSS software was utilized. 
	Results showed that most of the managers in girls' high-school in Urmia use explanation style, and job motivation among teachers are high. There is significant difference between teachers' maturity points and the managers' leadership style. The teachers' job motivation based on managers' leadership style is not deferent. No significant difference was observed between managers' leadership styles and the teachers' job motivation in district one and two. No significant difference between teachers' job motivation in governmental and private school was observed. 


