Methylmercury (MeHg) can be transferred to infants through milk, in addition to passage through the placenta during intrauterine life. The higher MeHg accumulation and susceptibility to toxicity in the fetus than in the mother during the gestation period is well known. However, the contribution of Hg exposure through breast milk to the MeHg concentration in infants is not clear. Our objective in this study was to examine the changes in MeHg levels in infants who were reared on breast milk to evaluate the risks between fetal and breast-feeding periods based on Hg concentrations in red blood cells (RBCs-Hg). RBCs-Hg and plasma-Hg concentrations (Plasma-Hg) in seven pairs of maternal and infant blood samples were compared at birth and 3 months after parturition. RBCs to Plasma-Hg ratio was approximately 8:1 for mothers at parturition and after 3 months, suggesting that their Hg source is MeHg from consumed fish as is general in Japanese. In all seven cases, RBCs-Hg in the umbilical cords were higher than those in the mothers at parturition. The geometric mean of RBCs-Hg in umbilical cords (10.6 ng/g) was about 1.4 times higher than that in the mothers (7.1 ng/g). There was a strong correlation in RBCs-Hg in mothers and umbilical cords. However, all the infants showed declines in Hg concentrations throughout the breast-feeding period. The geometric mean RBCs-Hg at 3 months of age was 5.8 ng/g, accounting for 54% of that in the umbilical cords. Consequently, maternal RBCs-Hg surpassed that of infants at 3 months, opposite to the situation at parturition. The decline in infant RBCs-Hg during the breast-feeding period can be explained by the low Hg transfer through breast milk and the rapid growth of infants after birth. The geometric mean Milk-Hg was low (0.21 ng/g), around 20% of that in maternal Plasma-Hg. The average body weight of infants at 3 months increased to about 1.9 times of that at birth. Thus, offspring are subjected to MeHg exposure through both the gestation and the breast-feeding periods; the risk is especially high during gestation but may decrease during breast-feeding.
