High concentrations of nitrate in groundwater and surface water make it unsuitable as drinking water. Furthermore, high nitrogen
emissions to the marine environment cause eutrophication with increased algal growth, changes in the biological communities and
deoxygenation. Both groundwater protection and eutrophication are significant environmental issues on the European agenda. The
main source of nitrogen in Europe is agricultural leaching from fields caused by excess inputs of fertilisers and manure compared to
harvested output. This is especially evident in North-western Europe. It is reflected in river concentrations of nitrate, which are
significantly highest in Western Europe. Since the late 1970s, nitrate concentrations have increased all over Europe reflecting
intensification of agriculture. High concentrations occur in groundwater in most parts of Europe and most coastal areas of Europe
show signs of eutrophication. In Denmark the Parliament in 1987 decided on the Action Plan on the Aquatic Environment (I), which
included measures in several sectors. For agriculture the target was a 49% reduction of nitrogen emissions in order to improve
groundwater quality and reduce marine loading. In the early 1990s monitoring results and modelling documented that the measures
taken in 1987 as well as additional measures taken were insufficient to reach the target. In late 1997 Action Plan on the Environment
(II) was agreed maintaining the target, which shall be reached by a range of measures including restoration of wetlands, afforestation,
groundwater protection areas, improved animal fodder utilisation, more stringent requirements on livestock density (harmony
criteria), more stringent nitrogen utilisation requirements for animal manure, and reduced nitrogen standards for crops. At the
European level, the Nitrates Directive has as objective to reduce nitrate emissions to groundwater and surface water. The fact that no
country yet has implemented the Directive, clearly documents the difficulties in taking efficient environmental measures in
agriculture. The recent Danish policy measures show that there is no easy and cheap solution, which is also politically acceptable.
Therefore a wide range of measures are needed to reduce a significant European environmental problem.
