This study identifies and quantifies the water–rock interactions responsible for the composition of 25 spring waters, and derives the weathering rates of rock-forming minerals in a complex of petrologic units containing ultramafics, amphibolites, augengneisses and micaschists. Bulk chemical analyses were used to calculate the mineralogical composition of these rocks; the composition of the rock-forming minerals were determined by microprobe analyses. The soils developed on augengneisses and micaschists contain predominantly halloysite; on the other units mixtures of halloysite and smectites. The mineralogical and chemical data on rocks and soils are essential for writing the proper weathering reactions and for solving mole balances between the amounts of weathered primary minerals and secondary products formed (soils and solutes in groundwater). Ground waters emanating in springs were collected in 3 consecutive seasons, namely late Summer, Winter and Spring, and analyzed for major components. Using an algorithm based on mole and charge balance equations, the average concentrations of the solutes were linked with a combination of possible weathering reactions. To sort out the best match of weathering reactions and the concomitantly generated water composition, the results were checked against the limiting condition of similarity between the predicted and actual clay mineral abundance in the soils. Having selected the best-fit weathering reactions, the mineral weathering rates could also be calculated by combining the median discharge rates and recharge areas of the springs and normalizing the rates by the mineral abundance. For the one case—plagioclase—for which comparison with published results was possible, the results compare favorably with rates calculated by other groups. For the most abundant primary minerals the following order of decreasing weathering rates was found (in moles/(ha·a·%mineral)): forsterite (485) > clinozoisite (114) > chlorite (49) > plagioclase (45) > amphibole (28). In as far as this order differs from commonly used orders of weatherability, this has to be due to differences in the hydrologic regime within this area and between this and other case studies. As additional objective, the authors wanted to explain the effects of contributions by sources other than water-rock interactions. The latter processes are coupled with acquisition of carbonate alkalinity and dissolved silica. Contributions by sources other than water–rock interactions are manifest by the Cl−, SO2−4 and NO−3 concentrations. It was possible to approximate the contribution of atmospheric deposition. More importantly, knowledge of the application and composition of fertilizers enabled assessment of the effects of farming on the composition of ground waters emanating in the springs. It was also possible to estimate how selective uptake of nutrients and cations by vegetation as well as ion-exchange processes in the soil modified the spring water composition. Using this rather holistic approach, it is possible to satisfactorily explain how spring waters, in this petrologically and agriculturally diverse area, acquired their composition.
