The vernacular form and physical pattern of settlements in Saudi Arabia evolved under the influence of visible and non-visible forces. Climate, tradition, religion, economic base and political stability are forces behind the overall underlying structure of the vernacular settlements. This article discusses the evolution of planning and urban theory from the perspectives of vernacular design in Saudi Arabia settlements. The evolution of the planning and urban theory of community design in Saudi Arabia is a very controversial theme. The vernacular architectural style can be distinguished easily from the contemporary style. Also, the organic grid pattern can be distinguished from the gridiron pattern used in planning modern neighbourhoods. However, the success or failure of vernacular and contemporary styles and patterns have created recurring arguments among many scholars. On one side, it is quite apparent that the continuity of vernacular organic patterns and styles is an evidence of success in creating secure and safe environment and establishing sense of place. On the other side, the inconsistency of contemporary styles and gridiron patterns is considered as an evidence of failure in creating unsafe and unidentifiable environment. Such an imbalance may result in an influential role of planning and urban theory in the evolution of new form of urbanization in a country like Saudi Arabia. The planning and urban concepts implemented by Arriyadh Development Authority (ADA), the Royal Commission of Jubail and Yanbu (RCJY), and the Ministry of Municipal and Rural Affairs (MOMRA) are tangible evidences for establishing a new approach in planning new neighbourhood. The paper focuses on finding an appropriate urban and design approach for future neighbourhood development. Its main objective is to achieve a balance between the social and physical aspects based on vernacular experiences. Finally, the paper concludes with the notion that a successful planning and urban theory must be based on imperatives based on culture, climate, religion, tradition and technology.
