Introduction: Despite several improvements in cardiovascular interventional procedures, the limitation due to their complications has made the cardiologists doubtful about them and much interest has focused on the acute outcome and complications of such interventions. Few surveys have been done in Iran on the complications and outcomes of cardiovascular interventional procedures as substitutes for costly surgical managements.  
Objective: To investigate success rate and outcomes and intrahospital complications of the patients undergoing cardiovascular interventions in Eman-Khomaini Hospital in 2010-2011.
Materials and Methods: In a descriptive retrospective survey, the medical files of 412 patients who underwent cardiovascular interventional procedures in Emam-Khomeili Hospital in 2010-2011, were studied and their clinical procedural and demographic data were derived. The respective laboratory data including Hb, HCT and CPK-MB before and after procedure and their post-procedural EKGs were assessed. Any major port-procedural major complications of the patients were registered. 
Results: The most common procedure was coronary artery angioplasty (352 patients), while other procedures were PTMC in 24 patients (5.8%), renal artery angioplasty in 14 patients (3.4%), ASD closure by Occluder in 7(1.7%), lower limb vascular in and carotid artery angioplasties in11(2.66%) and 1 (0.24%) patients, and PS valvuplasty in 3 patients (0.7%). Among the patients who underwent coronary angioplasty, 8 (2.27%) showed asymptomatic rise of CK-MB without any significant change in EKG. One case of coronary artery perforation in CTO plasty was detected while two patients were complicated with no reflow during 18 months. In thosewho underwent PTMC, only one case (4.2%) of asymptomatic mild MR was detected. Totally, no mortality was reported and no other complications were detected in the patients.
Conclusion: As the survey indicates, if the patients are chosen properly and the operators are competent and experienced, cardiovascular interventional procedures can be used with high efficacy, low risk and acceptable complication rate in the treatment of many cardiovascular disorders. 


