Introduction
Development of rural areas requires efficient planning and implementing strategies within the appropriate instructions and guidelines. Considering different dimensions of economic development as well as he social-cultural, environmental and institutional frameworks in addition to the capabilities and potentials in rural development are among the key points. One of the program was working, is tourism, which entails the existence of the pattern and the strategy for achieving this goal. A long-term strategic plan for tourism development is essential of course in all aspects to achieve development and its successful management, too. This approach leads decreasing possible threats and preventing possible losses. Therefore, in order to provide all elements of tourism development, communication and interaction among the tourist attractions, activities, facilities, services and tourism markets should be considered. Effective implementation of tourism policies and programs in the area, in order to provide the best strategies and solutions, and position of the tourism landscape have been identified too.

Methodology
The objective of this research is finding the appropriate strategies for developing rural tourism development. Therefore, three groups of people (rural families, tourists, officials) have been involved in the study. Population of 23 villages, which have organized & villages (2,848 households) with their potentials as well as attractiveness of the geographical location have been selected and considered. The 150 selected households (about 5 of the total number of households in each village provided that not less than 15) act the sample of local community. The population of tourists and officials during interviews and question week number of tourists has been estimated that 60 600 people of whom 10 percent of the population sample were selected as and officials of the 20 patients were selected. In this study the strengths and weaknesses as well as the opportunities and threats have been considered using SWOT analysis, for providing a strategic approach using the four-stage model of David's. R. Has been developed for tourism.

Results
The findings and opinions of three mentioned perspectives (public, officials and tourists), indicate that the first stage, the evaluation matrix (9 internal strengths and 11 weaknesses) and (7 to 9 external threat) have been ranked. Secondly, the total average views of three groups of participants - as factors of importance is calculated and a rank has been assigned to each of them The ranks are as follows: 4, an opportunity assay; 3, a common chance; 2, a common threat; and. 1, a threat. Finally 9 operating IFE local priority with a score of 39.2, and 8 external factors priority score EFE with 43.2 in the region is classified, In 3rd. phase in the matrix of internal and external IE scores IFE and EFE in horizontal and vertical dimensions of a matrix of four homes. a strong part of the spectrum (2.5 to 4) debilitating (1 to 2.5) is and the score matrix of internal and external position of the point with the highest score among the factors, weaknesses (W) and threats (T) is allocated and the main strategies of defensive strategies have been obtained In the fourth stage, using quantitative strategic planning matrix (QSPM) coefficient of relative attractiveness (AS) 1. Unimportant, 2. Low of, 3. Average of, 4. Importance to each of the various options identified and implemented strategies (defensive) is allocated and total attractiveness (important) in the matrix is calculated TAS, and the fourth defensive strategy, strategy WT2 with the highest score (36.7) as the final strategy as "preparation, and encourage people to participate in the development and equipping of rural infrastructure, tourist facilities and equipment to support the government." selected and introduced.

Conclusion
The tourism sector is among the fields of greatest vulnerability as an organized and defensive strategy "for providing practical solutions while minimizing the weaknesses of tourism in rural areas facing threats and so on. Development of rural tourism in this area requires planning and programming. Preparation, of it, with full participation of people requires special forces and experienced people in order to create a cooperative association. Promotion of tourism and education meets the needs of people through the study area and joint venture between foreign and local investors, as well as exercise greater control over investment the state is necessary too.

