Deposition processes of particles with dry diameter larger than about 10 μm are dominated by gravitational settling, while molecular diffusion and Brownian motion predominate the deposition processes of particles smaller than 0.1 μm in dry diameter. Many air pollution derived elements exhibit characteristics common to sub-micron particles. The objective of the present study is to examine the effects of meteorological conditions within the turbulent transfer layer on the deposition velocity of particles with dry diameter between 0.1 and 1 μm. It is for these sub-micron particles that particle growth by condensation in the deposition layer, the broken water surface effect and the enhanced transfer process due to atmospheric turbulence in the turbulent transfer layer play important roles in controlling the particle deposition velocity. Results of the present study show that the ‘dry air’ assumption of Williams’ model is unrealistic. Effects of ambient air relative humidity and water surface temperature cannot be ignored in determining the deposition velocity over a water surface. Neglecting effects of ambient air relative humidity and water surface temperature will result in defining atmospheric stability incorrectly. It is found that the largest effect of air relative humidity on deposition velocity occurs at an air–water temperature difference corresponding to the point of ‘displaced neutral stability'. For a given wind speed of U=5 m s−1 the additive effects of water surface temperature, Tw, changes from 5 to 25°C and ambient air relative humidity variations from 85 to 60%, respectively, lead to a maximum difference in vd of about 20%. For a higher wind speed of 10 m s−1, however, the corresponding change in vd reduces to less than 5%. This is further confirmation that wind speed is one of the strongest variables that governs the magnitude of vd. The present study also found that the broken surface transfer coefficient, kbs, given as a multiple of the smooth surface transfer coefficient, kss, is physically more meaningful than assigning it a constant value independent of particle size. The method used in this study requires only a single level of atmospheric data coupled with the surface temperature measurement. The present method is applicable for determining deposition velocity not only at the conventional measurement height of 10 m but also at any other heights that are different from the measurement height.
