Continuous measurements of ozone vertical profiles, OVP, in the low troposphere (around 500–2400 m) using an unattended commercial ozone profiler DIAL, were conducted during June–July 2004 in Segovia, SG, a small city in the upper plateau located close to the foothills of the Guadarrama mountain range, Guadarrama, in the Central Massif. The data obtained over almost 37 complete days have enabled us to characterise the ozone vertical exchange, describe the phenomenology of the main ozone peaks, OP, recorded in the city and their relationship with ozone transport/formation from the gas precursor emissions of the greater Madrid area across Guadarrama. To achieve the last objective concurrent measurements of ground-level ozone in SG and a representative monitoring station upwind from Guadarrama, Buitrago de Lozoya, BL, have been used. 72.2% of the concurrent maximum diurnal ozone peaks exceeding the 95 percentile hourly value in SG (OPSG) and BL (OPBL) were linked to ozone transport and formation from the greater Madrid area towards Guadarrama. An estimate of the contribution of the greater Madrid area on OPSG yielded 28 μg m−3.
The most prominent ozone vertical stratification was linked to the mixing height, MH, and a frequent nocturnal stable layer formed, NSL. Three small ozone enriched-layers were identified at mean heights of 500, 700 and 1000 m, respectively. Ozone tended to decline versus altitude. The hourly patterns of the three layers showed two peak occurrences of similar amplitude in the early morning, 7–8 h, and mid-afternoon, 14–16 h. A minimum was also observed during daytime, 10–11 h, its origin being attributed to a dilution process induced by the “chimney effect” caused by the slopes heating during this period.
The comparison between OPSG, and the maximum diurnal ozone peaks in the first layer, OL1P, showed a satisfactory relationship, correlation coefficient, r, of the linear fit 0.77, and comparable mean values, 127 and 130 μg m−3, respectively, revealing the presence of an uniform ozone vertical distribution in the 500 m atmospheric layer above ground level during mid-afternoon.

