The objective of this study was to define operating conditions which would conciliate a high removal of the five metallic cations (Cu2+, Ni2+, Zn2+, Cd2+, Pb2+) and a low desorption of these metal ions from the contaminated sorbents. To achieve this goal the strategy relied on the use of experimental design methodology. The influence of four parameters (fly ash/lime mass ratio, type of fly ash/lime sorbent, solution temperature, and sorbent concentration) on the removal at pH=5 and the stabilization of the five metallic ions was studied. In the first step, the influence of three parameters on the removal of Cu2+ ions was studied (R2=fly ash/lime mass ratio, type of sorbent, temperature). It was found that the same set of parameter values would produce both the highest removal and the lowest desorption for this cation: R2=9 g g−1, sorbent B (made by mixing fly ash and lime in water, then drying this paste at 105°C for 24 h), temperature of suspension equal to 60°C. The formation of calcium silicate hydrate (CSH), resulting from the pozzolanic activity of fly ash, is assumed to be partially responsible for these mechanisms. In the second step, simplex methodology and Doehlert matrix were used to find the conditions in a 2D space (sorbent concentration, temperature of solution) that would give the highest removal from a solution containing five metallic cations and the lowest desorption of these five cations adsorbed on the contaminated sorbents. Then, the system response that had to be optimized was the total metallic ions concentration (TMIC, mol L−1). A TMIC was measured both for adsorption and leaching experiments. These responses were modelized using a second-order polynomial and the surface responses were plotted for adsorption and desorption results. A difference was observed between operating conditions reaching the highest adsorption from those that gave the lowest desorption. However, an adsorbent concentration around 122 g L−1 and a solution temperature of 66°C would lead simultaneously to a high adsorption and a low desorption.
