Degradation of 2-chlorobenzoic acid (2-CBA), a model recalcitrant chlorinated organic compound, by pure cultures of Burkholderia cepacia strain DNT with (transformed B. cepacia) and without (untransformed B. cepacia) the bacterial hemoglobin (Vitreoscilla hemoglobin, VHb) gene, vgb, was investigated in parallel membrane bioreactors (MBRs). This was done aseptically to prevent contamination during the operation of the MBRs. The objective was to determine whether the degradation of 2-CBA by cometabolism, using acetate as a primary carbon source, under hypoxic conditions might be enhanced for vgb-bearing cells in MBRs. The 2-CBA removal efficiency of transformed B. cepacia (97–99%) was slightly higher than that of untransformed B. cepacia (95–99%) at all stages. The average amount of chloride released from 2-CBA by transformed cells was also higher than for untransformed cells, 92–96% compared to 64–84% of the maximum theoretical amount, the exact value depending on the operating conditions. These results indicate that 2-CBA degradation/transformation is not accompanied by the stoichiometric release of chloride for the untransformed strain. The difference between percentages of 2-CBA removal and chloride release by untransformed cells was attributed to persistence, under hypoxic conditions, of the 2-CBA chlorine atom in 2-CBA metabolites. Growth of transformed cells was also significantly enhanced under hypoxic conditions compared to untransformed cells. For varying media compositions, the transformed cells reached higher cell densities (3.2–5.4 g/L) relative to untransformed cells (2.8–4.7 g/L) at food to microorganism ratios ranging from 0.44–0.59 to 0.38–0.49 g COD/g biomass-d The observed yields thus ranged from 0.16–0.20 and 0.15–0.18 g TSS/g COD for untransformed and transformed cells, respectively. The value of the yield depended on medium composition. The MBR system using vgb-containing B. cepacia maintained a high biomass concentration without oxygen limitations and provided cell-free effluent. Hence, it may be useful for treating high volumes of water contaminated with low levels of recalcitrant organics.
