Background: The prevalence of obesity and associated chronic
disease such as diabetes is rapidly increasing in all part of the world.
The World Health Organization has predicted that between 1997 and
2025 the number of diabetic patients will increase from 143 million
to about 300 million. In diabetic patients, oxidative stress leads to
non?enzymatic glycosylation of proteins such as hemoglobin and
albumin, these proteins can play a significant role in pathogenesis
of diabetes and development of chronic disorders in diabetic
patients. Antioxidant nutrients can reduce the chronic disorders and
complications of diabetes by inhibiting the oxidative reactions. Some
important antioxidant such as vitamin A, vitamin C, vitamin E and
selenium occur in vegetables and fruits. Our objective of this study
was investigation of the relationship between vegetables and fruits
intake ssand glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C) values in diabetic
patients.
Methods: One hundred and five diabetic patients participated in this
cross?sectional study. The patients were referred to health center in
Khomeini shahr. Glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C) values were
measured by chromatography method. Data on dietary intake and
vegetables and fruits consumption were obtained from validated food
frequency questionnaires.
Results: The unadjusted mean glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C)
is significantly associated with the amount of vegetables and fruits
intake (P = 0.014), but the relationship between consumption of fruits
and HbA1C is not significant and the relationship between consumption
of vegetables and HbA1C was roughly significant (P = 0.049). There
were no significant relationship between vegetables and fruits intake
and lipids profiles, BUN/creatinine and 24 h urinary protein (P  >  0.05).
Conclusions: Intake of vegetables and fruits may reduce the
glycosylated hemoglobin, therefore choosing the appropriate diet with
high fruits and vegetables may help to develop antioxidant defense
and reduce the HbA1C in diabetic patients but it did not have any
impact on lipids profiles, BUN/creatinine and urine protein 24 h.
