The primary objective of this paper is to explain current U.S. policy on global climate change. U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) efforts to implement this policy will be described. A secondary objective of this paper is to discuss from a U.S. perspective the social and political efforts which must be initiated in order for ocean storage of CO2 to be considered as a viable CO2 mitigation option. The fact that the Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) has not been successful in reducing greenhouse gas emissions is now recognized. Thus, U.S. policy has shifted towards the development of binding medium-term emissions targets and long-term atmosphere concentration goals. The U.S. believes these goals can be accomplished through the adoption of cost-effective joint implementation agreements and international emissions trading mechanisms. Studies are currently underway to assess specific targets and timetables for emissions reductions. Voluntary efforts on the part of U.S. industry have proven to be extremely successful in reducing U.S. CO2 emissions. The U.S. electric utility industry has taken the lead in voluntarily lowering greenhouse gas emissions under the DOE Climate Challenge Program. As of August, 1996, nearly 600 utility participants, accounting for over 60% of electric power generation in the U.S., have joined the program. Areas of research interest to DOE include the development of high efficiency advanced power generation cycles and CO2 sequestration technology. The U.S. currently spends $1.6 billion on understanding global climate phenomena and only $1.6 million on CO2 mitigation research. A number of socio-political considerations must be looked at in assessing the feasibility of ocean storage of CO2. Developing public trust appears to be a major concern in establishing the acceptability of ocean storage. Uncertainties in the effects of CO2 on marine life, potential safety hazards associated with pipelining, and ship transport of CO2 are all issues which must be dealt with as soon as possible. Some hidden costs associated with ocean disposal will also be discussed.
