During 1998, Eli Lilly and Company conducted a demonstration of commercially available particulate matter continuous emission monitoring systems (PM CEMS) on a liquid hazardous waste incinerator at Lilly's Clinton Labs in Clinton, Indiana. The objective of this demonstration was to evaluate the performance and reliability of PM CEMS in a moisture-saturated flue gas over several months of operation. The demonstration was conducted in two phases designed to conform with Performance Specification 11 (PS 11) of the proposed Hazardous Waste Combustor MACT Rule. Performance was measured by comparing the PM CEMS output with the results of proposed Reference Method 5i developed by EPA during its PM CEMS demonstration test program at Dupont in 1997. During both phases of testing, two PM CEMS were utilized for this test program. These were the Groupe Environnment S. A. (ESA) Model Beta 5M and the Sigrist Photometer AG (Sigrist) Model KTNRM/SIGAR4000. The ESA monitor's operation is based on beta radiation attenuation technology while the Sigrist monitor operation is based on optical light scattering technology. Both instruments employ extractive sample systems to condition the moisture-saturated flue gas. Results of the initial phase of the test program concluded that the commercially available PM CEMS evaluated were not ready to be used as compliance tools. Both the beta gauge (ESA) and the light scattering (Sigrist) monitors failed to meet all of the requirements in proposed PS 11. The objective of the second phase was to implement suggestions made to US EPA and the CEMS vendors regarding improvement to the PM CEMS and calibration procedures in PS 11. In addition, knowledge gained from observing TUV Rheinland successfully calibrate a Sigrist PM CEMS on a HWI at the Eli Lilly Kinsale, Ireland facility was utilized for this second demonstration. Results of the second phase of the test program showed that after a significant learning curve the two extractive PM CEMS evaluated could be calibrated successfully, relative to the requirements of PS 11.
