Following the implementation of two dams in the Senegal River, entomological and parasitological studies were conducted in three different ecological zones in the Senegal River Basin (the low valley of Senegal River, the Guiers Lake area and the low valley of Ferlo) every 3 month in June 2004, September 2004, December 2004 and March 2005. The objective of this work was to study the influence of environmental heterogeneities on vector bionomics and malaria epidemiology. Mosquitoes were collected when landing on human volunteers and by pyrethrum spray catches. In the parasitological survey, blood samples were taken from a cohort of schoolchildren under 9 years during each entomology survey. Seven anopheline species were collected: Anopheles arabiensis, Anopheles gambiae M form, Anopheles funestus, Anopheles pharoensis, Anopheles coustani, Anopheles wellcomei and Anopheles rufipes. A. arabiensis, A. funestus and A. pharoensis were predominant in the low valley of the Senegal River, A. funestus in the Guiers Lake area and A. arabiensis in the low valley of Ferlo. Mosquito populations’ dynamics varied temporally depending on the rainy season for each zone. The anthropophilic rates varied between 6 and 76% for A. gambiae s.l. and 23 and 80% for A. funestus. Only 4/396 A. pharoensis and 1/3076 A. funestus tested carried Plasmodium falciparum CS antigen. These results suggest the implication of A. pharoensis in malaria transmission. The related entomological inoculation rates were estimated to 10.44 in Mbilor and 3 infected bites in Gankette Balla and were due, respectively, to A. pharoensis and A. funestus. Overall, 1636 thick blood smears were tested from blood samples taken from schoolchildren with, respectively, a parasite and gametocyte average prevalence of 9 and 0.9%. The parasite prevalence was uniformly low in Mbilor and Gankette Balla whereas; it increased in September (16%) and then remained stable in December and March (22%) in Mboula where malaria transmission was not perceptible. However, significant differences were observed over time for parasite prevalence in Mbilor and Mboula villages whereas; it was only in Gankette Balla village where gametocyte prevalence was significantly different over time. Our study demonstrates the influence of ecological changes resulted from dams implementation in the Senegal River on the composition of vectorial system, malaria transmission and epidemiology. Such changes should be thoroughly surveyed in order to prevent any possible malaria outbreak in the Senegal River Basin.
