Study Objective
This study was conducted to assess the impact (diagnostic, therapeutic, and disposition) of the 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) on emergency department (ED) patient evaluation and management.
Methods
This project was a prospective study of a convenience sample of 304 ED patients undergoing ECG analysis during their evaluation in the ED of a level 1 trauma center. The data collection for this study was divided into 4 parts. In part I, the treating physicians determined the specific reasons for ECG analysis; categories include complaint-based (eg, chest pain), syndrome-based (eg, overdose/poisoning), and system-based (eg, “requested by consult”). In part II, all treating physicians were surveyed before ECG interpretation regarding the future diagnostic, therapeutic, and disposition plans for the patient based only on history and physical examination. Their comments were recorded on a standardized data sheet. In part III, the physicians were surveyed after their interpretation of the ECG as to whether the results could suggest any further diagnostic information (eg, normal vs abnormal), or provide enough information for the patient care plan to be altered. In part IV of the study period, alterations to the original diagnostic, therapeutic, and disposition plans made by information provided by the ECG were obtained from the treating physician.
Results
A total of 304 patients underwent ECG examination and were used for data analysis. The average age of patients, of which 48% were men, was 60 years. The most common complaints that prompted electrocardiographic evaluation were chest pain and dyspnea. The most common reason an ECG was ordered was nursing staff protocol. Physicians determined that they were able to make a diagnosis based primarily on ECG in 33 (10.9%) cases. The total number of ECGs that were determined to be normal was 95 (31.3%), 7 (2.3%) of which allowed a rule-out diagnosis; 209 (68.7%) of total ECGs were determined to be abnormal, 72 (23.6%) of which were considered “of diagnostic significance.” In 96 (31.6%) cases of electrocardiographic interpretation, alterations were made to the diagnostic, therapeutic, or disposition plans because of the information provided by the ECG.
Conclusions
The ECG provides clinical information that frequently alters the management plan.

