Background
The majority of older persons in Lebanon live with their family, which provides the help and care required when their relative is functionally impaired. Knowing that taking care of an older impaired relative is considered a source of enrichment for the caregiver and an act of gratitude towards the older person in Lebanon. However, there are few formal resources to support these families. This study is informed by a theoretical framework of stress.
Objective
Identify the dimensions of the caring context related to the health of Lebanese family caregivers living with an older impaired relative.
Design
Exploratory correlational study.
Participants
Convenience sample (N=319) drawn from all the regions of Lebanon according to predetermined quotas on the basis of relative demographic weight and socio-economic class. The inclusion criteria are: aged 18 years or over; primary caregiver; provided help with at least one ADL or IADL once a week; lived with the older impaired person. 13.5% refused to participate in the study. The caregivers recruited were female (84%), adult children (48%) or spouses (22.6%) with a mean age of 46 years. Almost half of them reported a post-compulsory level of education and a low monthly household income and no medical coverage for 68% of them.
Methods
The data were collected during a face-to-face interviews with the caregivers in their homes.
Results
The results from regression analyses indicate that the degree of functional impairment, the frequency of depressive and disruptive behaviours of cared-for relative are linked to at least one of three caregiver health indicators (p<.01). Also, caregiver cognitive appraisal of these stressors is associated with either role strain or feeling of helplessness (p<.05). The informal emotional support received by caregivers is positively related to well-being (p<.001), whereas interpersonal conflicts with family and friends diminish caregiver well-being and increase role strain (p<.001). Sufficiency of emotional support received is negatively associated with role strain (p<.001).
Conclusion
Many stressors proved associated with one or other of the health indicators under study and the resources emerged as significant factors related to caregiver's health.

