Background
Posttraumatic stress is one of many psychological late effects in young adult survivors of childhood cancer and needs to be explored thoroughly.
Objective
The purpose of this study was to examine the characteristics and correlates of posttraumatic stress symptoms in a sample of young adult survivors of childhood cancer.
Design
Cross-sectional and correlational descriptive design was used. Data was collected by a mailed survey. The University of California at Los Angeles Post Traumatic Stress Disorder Index (PTSDI) was the measure selected for the evaluation of posttraumatic stress.
Setting
The study took place in a medical center in the Eastern part of the United States.
Participants
The inclusion criteria for participants were: (a) diagnosis of childhood cancer between birth and 19 years of age; (b) 3 or more years post successful completion of cancer treatment; (c) free of active cancer; (d) at least 19 years of age; and (e) able to read and write English. A total of 51.1% (N=46) of the potentially eligible survivors responded to the survey. The analysis was based on the data from 45 respondents who had a mean age of 27.4 years.
Results
The mean PTSDI score was 15.7 (SD=11.0, range=0–43). Thirteen percent (n=6) of participants had PTSDI scores that exceeded the cutoff point of 32, which is considered indicative of clinically significant posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Participants who lived alone (t=−2.17, p=.035), had no health insurance (t=2.08, p=.044) and did not have a history of bone marrow transplantation (t=4.52, p=.000) reported significantly higher scores on PTSDI than others. The clinically significant PTSD group had a significantly higher rate of living alone than the non-PTSD group (p=.038).
Conclusion
Cancer-related posttraumatic stress emerges in childhood cancer survivors in young adulthood. Health care providers should screen childhood cancer survivors for posttraumatic stress so that referrals can be made to provide survivors with further assistance.

