Background
Individuals are adherent to approximately 50% of their prescribed medications, which decreases when multiple, chronic conditions are involved.
Objective
To examine factors affecting adherence to multiple prescribed medications for consumers with co-existing diabetes and chronic kidney disease (diabetic kidney disease) from the time of prescription to the time they took their medications.
Design
A descriptive exploratory design was used incorporating in-depth interviews and focus groups.
Setting
The diabetes and nephrology departments of two metropolitan, public hospitals in Melbourne, Australia.
Participants
A convenience sample of 23 consumers with diabetic kidney disease participated in an in-depth interview. Inclusion criteria involved English-speaking individuals, aged ≥18 years, with co-existing diabetes and chronic kidney disease, and who were mentally competent. Exclusion criteria included impending commencement on dialysis, pregnancy, an aggressive form of cancer, or a mental syndrome that was not stabilised with medication. Sixteen health professionals working in diabetes and nephrology departments in Melbourne, Australia also participated in one of two focus groups.
Methods
In-depth structured interviews and focus groups were conducted and analysed according to a model of medication adherence.
Results
Consumers were not convinced of the need, effectiveness and safety of all of their medications. Alternatively, health professionals focussed on the importance of consumers taking their medications as prescribed and believed that the risk of medication-related adverse effects was over-rated. Accessing prescribed medications and difficulties surrounding continuity of care contributed to consumers’ unintentional medication non-adherence. In particular, it was hard for consumers to persist taking their ongoing medication prescriptions. Healthcare system inadequacies were highlighted, which affected relationships between consumers with diabetic kidney disease and health professionals.
Conclusions
Acknowledging the barriers as perceived by consumers with diabetic kidney disease can facilitate effective communication and partnerships with health professionals necessary for medication adherence and medication safety.

