Study Objective: The purpose of this study is to compare the microscopic examination and human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA subtyping of vulvar specimens from premenarchal girls clinically diagnosed with condyloma to determine whether DNA subtyping aids in the diagnostic process.
Design: A retrospective chart review was performed on all premenarchal girls who underwent surgical treatment of clinically diagnosed condyloma between 1993 and 1999 at the University of Michigan Medical Center by the Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology Service. Tissue was sent for pathologic evaluation and in 10 patients the specimens also underwent DNA subtyping. One patient had prior DNA subtyping. All the other lesions were surgically ablated. The microscopic slides were reviewed by a single pathologist blinded to the study.
Setting: The study was performed in a tertiary care university hospital.
Participants: The study group included 11 premenarchal girls with an average age of 2.3 yr.
Main Outcome Measures: The charts were reviewed for previous HPV treatment, maternal history of HPV, history of sexual abuse, microscopic diagnosis, and HPV DNA subtyping.
Results: Four patients had prior surgical treatment and two patients had undergone prior medical treatment. The microscopic diagnosis was condyloma in 8 patients, chronic dermatitis in 2 patients, and 1 patient had VIN 2-3. All 11 specimens tested positive for HPV DNA, 10 specimens contained at least one of the low-risk subtypes (6, 11, 42, 43, 44), and 1 tested positive for low-risk as well as intermediate/high-risk HPV subtypes (16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 45, 51, 52, 56).
Conclusions: Although all the patients with a clinical diagnosis of condyloma tested positive for HPV DNA, only 9 of 11 were definitely diagnosed with HPV-related pathology by microscopic examination. Therefore, in premenarchal patients with verrucous lesions in the anogenital area, microscopic evaluation alone may be inadequate as a confirmatory test when a positive clinical diagnosis has been made, and HPV DNA subtyping should be considered to avoid confusion with the diagnosis.

