Background
There are only a few reports analyzing the long term outcome of feminizing surgery in females with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). Such analysis is crucial to evaluate the treatment and to make necessary adjustments.
Study Objective
To evaluate the adult outcome after feminizing surgery in adult females with salt wasting CAH.
Design
Retrospective observational followup investigation.
Setting
Outpatient clinic of a University Medical Center, in 2002.
Participants
Eight patients (born 1973–1983) who underwent feminizing surgery in infancy by the same procedure and the same pediatric surgeon in our center, and 19 healthy female controls (for visual analog scales).
Methods
(a) Study of patients' records (n = 8); (b) Systematic evaluation of the current situation (n = 6): uroflowmetry, a written questionnaire to screen for psychopathology (Youth Adult Self Report, YASR), structured gynecologic examination and a structured psychosexual interview, including scoring on visual analog scales.
Results
(a) The first surgery (age 0.1–3.7 yr) consisted of clitoris reduction and vaginoplasty (single-stage) in 7 patients and clitoris reduction only in one patient. The latter patient had vaginoplasty in puberty. In puberty, 6 of the 7 patients with an initial single-stage procedure required re-vaginoplasty. All 6 patients who participated in this systematic evaluation had undergone (re-) vaginoplasty in puberty; (b) 2 of the 6 patients experienced some urinary incontinence, and in one of them, the uroflowmetry result was abnormal. The YASR showed no psychopathology, except for 1 patient with a slightly elevated externalizing score. Gynecologic examination (n = 5) revealed vaginal strictures in 3 patients (1 severe, 2 mild). The 2 patients without vaginal strictures had coitus regularly. In the interview, 2 patients called themselves bisexual, the other 4 heterosexual. None of the patients had homosexual contacts. Sexual developmental milestones (romantic interest, falling in love, kissing and petting, coitus) had been reached by all, except for 1 patient who did not have coitus yet. In the patient group, satisfaction with height, body hair, and external genitalia and sexual fantasies and interest, measured with visual analog scales, was not different compared to the control group, except for satisfaction with total body appearance, which was significantly lower in the patients.
Conclusion
Despite the poor outcome of the initial single-stage surgery in infancy and the inevitable re-operation in puberty, the adult outcome in our study population seems more positive than the findings in the few previous reports, especially with respect to sexual development and activity.

