ABSTRACT: Sustainable development in forage corn (zea maiz) production is an issue of growing
concern. In order to estimating the energy consumption and forage corn yield in Agricultural
Research Center of Semnan Province ( Shahrood), this study was conducted. This study was about
the energy efficiency of forage corn production. Calculations include energy output (contents of
energy in forage sorghum) and energy inputs (consumption of fertilizers, pesticides, labor, machines,
fuel and electricity). The ratio of output of the production to inputs is called the energy outputs /
inputs ratio. One way to quantify essential parts of agricultural development is the energy flow
method. The output / input energy ratio is proposed as the most comprehensive single factor in
pursuing the objective of sustainability. Results of this investigation showed that among direct
energy, the highest value is related to irrigation. Mean direct energy input in one hectare of forage
corn was calculated about 5673.5 MJ/ha. Nitrogen consists the highest portion of indirect energy
inputs and average indirect energy was about 25731MJ/ha. Total energy input in one hectare of
forage corn in Shahrood was 314040.5MJ/ha. Mean energy output calculated 1046000MJ/ha. In this
study energy efficiency was 33.61. Results showed that, forage corn yield wasn 95000 kg/ha. Since
most energy consumption is related to Irrigation water, fertilizers and machinery operation. So, the
use of new methods of irrigation (pressurized irrigation), precise application of fertilizers and new
methods of tillage (conservation tillage) can increase the energy efficiency. Application of Tape
irrigation, fertigation and reduced tillage that consumed lower energy, will increase energy efficiency
in agriculture. Regarding energy efficiency of forage corn yield in Tape irrigation and fertigation, it
can be recommended that furrow irrigation and fertilizer broadcasting can be replaced by Tape
irrigation and fertigation. Also, because much of the energy consumption of mechanical energy
comprises the other hand, most of the mechanical energy is used in the tillage, use of modern
methods of tillage (conservation tillage), thereby saving energy and increasing productivity energy.
