Recent studies in many countries had revealed the impact of many factors including:
Satisfaction, Knowledge, Demographic and Attitudinal variables in level of people participation. The
main question here is, whether these factors would also be effective on people participation in Iran? The
purpose of this research was to investigate communication factors influencing knowleg of farmers’
application of Watershed Management Operations (WMO) in the Kushk-Abad watershed in Khorassan
Razavi Province of Iran (85km2). The main purpose of this study is to assess factors that influence
people’s participation in Iran. The study consist of all farmers in watershed study (N = 1500), of which
200 is selected through proportionate stratified random sampling technique (n = 200). The study was a
descriptive-co relational, survey research. In fact, this research was designed to assess relationship
between Watershed projects successful and the level of participation in WMO in Iran. In order to obtain
this objective, a cross sectional survey was coducted. Data for this research collected through personal
interviews from three villages in Kushk-Abad sub basin in Iran. The scale of Watershed projects
successful of WMO and Participation in WMO were in order 0.78 and 0.92. Findings in the study
indicated that a majority of the farmers have Watershed projects successful of WMO. The results showed
that the level of the participation of WMO is moderate and there is a significant and positive correlation
between farmers’ Watershed projects successful of watershed management operations. However
according to the findings, the level of economical participation of people are the more than social and
environmental participation. Inaddition, the results clarified that the level of the respondents’ Watershed
projects successful is moderate to high. This study also proved that participation in WMO is positively
and significantly correlated with Watershed projects successful of WMO (r = 0.461, p = 0.000).
