Background: Addressing non-alcoholic, at-risk patterns of alcohol consumption that are associated with increased morbidity and mortality is an important health care priority.

Objective: The objective was to describe the prevalence and characteristics of at-risk drinkers in a population-based sample of adults with routine primary care visits.

Methods: Three thousand four hundred thirty-nine patients with advance appointments in 23 primary care practices completed a health survey prior to their visit. At-risk drinking was defined as consuming an average of two or more drinks per day (chronic drinking), or two or more occasions of consuming five or more drinks in the past month (binge drinking), or, in the past month, one or more occasion of driving after consuming three or more drinks (drinking and driving).

Results: Prevalence was: 11% at-risk drinking; 63% light to moderate drinking; 26% abstinence. Abstainers differed from alcohol users on demographics (older, fewer Caucasian, lower income, more unemployed), other health behaviors (less exercise, lower rates of smoking, and marijuana and cocaine use), and family history of alcohol problems (lower). Abstainers also reported poorer physical and psychological health. Compared to light to moderate drinkers, at-risk drinkers were more likely to be male, unmarried, and to use other substances (tobacco, marijuana, and cocaine). Among at-risk drinkers, those with two or more risk factors were more likely male, consumed more alcohol per week, had higher AUDIT scores and were more motivated to change their drinking. Among those with only one risk factor, binge drinkers reported high rates of tobacco and marijuana use, relatively poor perceived health, and the highest proportion of negative consequences from drinking.

Conclusions: At least 1 in 10 patients making routine primary care visits have drinking practices that place them at risk for negative consequences from drinking. Three drinking patterns that can be used to define at-risk drinking are relatively distinct. 
