Background. There is a controversy as to the relative importance of obesity vs quality of dietary fat in the prediction of serum lipoproteins in children. A reason for this is an apparent lack of studies implementing biomarkers of long-term dietary fat intake among children. The objective of the present study was to assess the relative contribution of degree of obesity, fat centrality, and quality of adipose tissue fat in the prediction of serum lipids in 12-year-old children.

Methods. Pupils came from 40 schools randomly selected among 541 primary schools in three different provinces of the island of Crete. One thousand forty-six pupils were examined at age 6. At age 9, a representative sample from the original cohort (n = 579) was randomly selected for reevaluation. At the age of 12, a representative sample of 831 pupils was reexamined. At ages 6, 9, and 12, serum lipid measures were obtained from 941, 458, and 791 children, respectively. At age 12, data were obtained on pupils' anthropometry, serum lipids, dietary intake, physical fitness, and physical activity. Adipose tissue fatty acid data were obtained from a subsample of 194 children at age 12.

Results. Regression analyses indicated that children's serum triglycerides related positively to body mass index and waist-hip ratio (WHR). Serum HDL-C related negatively to WHR and positively to endurance run test, an index of physical fitness. Dietary fatty acids, assessed by a single administration of 3-day weighed-food records, did not relate to serum lipids. However, serum HDL-C related negatively to sum of adipose polyunsaturated fatty acids, a measure of long-term polyunsaturated fat intake.

Conclusions. It appears that obesity and fat centrality are stronger predictors of children's serum lipids than the quality of long-term dietary fat intake or adipose tissue fatty acid composition. It is possible that this finding may relate to the particular subcutaneous depot studied. It is suggested that future studies study abdominal rather than buttock adipose tissue fatty acid composition in relation to children's serum lipid levels. 
