Background and objectives
Atheroembolism, caused by peripheral embolization of small cholesterol crystals that fracture off of ruptured atherosclerotic plaques in the major vessels, leads to multifocal ischemic lesions and progressive tissue loss. The end result is often ischemic injury in the skin, kidney, brain, myocardium, and intestine, but any organ distal to the culprit lesion may be affected. The precise incidence of this serious clinical syndrome has been difficult to ascertain from the available literature, but it appears to be much more common than has been assumed. The objective of the present study is to clarify the incidence of atheroembolism among inpatients in an acute hospital setting.
Patients and methods
We surveyed inpatient nephrology consultations during a 7-month period from January through July 1994. From a pool of 402 consultation charts, 99 were identified with two or more substantive risk factors for atheroembolism. The records of 85 of these patients were available for careful review. More than 300 additional patients were found to have ICD-9 discharge codes for other vascular conditions, but we were unable to confirm that any of these were in fact cases of atheroembolism, since there is no specific ICD-9 discharge code for this entity. In the 85 cases reviewed, a diagnosis of atheroembolism was made only if the patient had identifiable substantive risk factors, suggestive physical findings, and supporting laboratory results.
Results
Eleven of the 85 surveyed records documented strong evidence supporting a “probable” diagnosis of atheroembolism. Tissue was examined in 4 of these 11, resulting in definitive histologic confirmation in 3. Another 5 of the 85 surveyed records were “suggestive” of atheroembolism. Altogether, atheroembolism was a likely diagnosis in a total of 16 cases during this 7-month period, or 1 case every 2 weeks. These cases comprised 19% of nephrology consultations in which 2 or more risk factors were present, or 4% of all nephrology consultations. The patients' records confirmed the serious implications of clinically detectable atheroembolism. Several patients underwent lower extremity amputation, nearly half required acute or chronic dialysis, and more than half died within several months of diagnosis.
Conclusions
The present study suggests that at least 4% of all inpatient nephrology consultations, representing approximately 5% to 10% of the acute renal failure encountered, involve clinically significant atheroembolism. Patients with atheroembolism appear at a rate of at least 1 case every 2 weeks. They often have identifiable substantive risk factors at initial consultation, and probably represent only the most severe cases of atheroembolism. In view of the serious implications of this basically untreatable syndrome, heightened awareness and preventive maneuvers in the population at risk are essential.

