Background and Objectives
Excess cardiovascular morbidity and mortality among African (black) Americans is the subject of intensive investigation but the etiology remains speculative. One hypothesis proposes that inherent, or intrinsic, differences in coronary vascular reactivity and endothelial function predispose African Americans to enhanced vasoconstriction and/or depressed vasodilation, resulting in excess ischemia. The objective of this study was to establish whether coronary vasoreactivity differs among normotensive, nondiabetic African and white Americans with normal arteries referred for coronary arteriography because of chest pain.
Patients and Methods
Eleven African American (8 female, 3 male) and 28 white American (9 female, 19 male) normotensive, euglycemic patients with normal coronary arteries were prospectively recruited for invasive testing of coronary artery and microvascular relaxation using the endothelium-dependent and — independent agents, acetylcholine and adenosine; a Doppler tipped intracoronary guidewire; and quantitative coronary angiography.
Results
The study cohort consisted of 17 women (44%) and 22 men (56%) with a mean age of 46 ± 10 yrs. Of 8 African American women, 6 were premenopausal and 2 were postmenopausal on estrogen replacement therapy. Of 9 white American women, 2 were premenopausal, 1 was 46-years old with a previous history of hysterectomy without ovariectomy, 2 were postmenopausal on estrogen replacement therapy, 2 were perimenopausal and 44- and 54-years old, and 2 were postmenopausal without estrogen replacement therapy. In response to maximal infusion of acetylcholine, epicardial coronary arteries and resistance vessels dilated similarly in black and white subjects. Dose-response curves revealed no significant racial differences during submaximal graded infusion of acetylcholine. In response to peak effect of adenosine, there were no racial differences in dilation of the microcirculation.
Conclusions
In the absence of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and angiographic evidence of coronary artery disease, African American women demonstrate no evidence of intrinsic predisposition to enhanced coronary conduit vasoconstriction or depressed microcirculatory dilation in response to the endothelium-dependent and -independent vasodilator agonists-acetylcholine and adenosine-when compared with responses of similar white men and women. Because of low enrollment of black males, definitive conclusions cannot be drawn regarding this group.

