Background and Aim: The most important and vital property of health centers is efficient manpower. Since nursing interns   are effective members of the patient care team in educational institutions and their efficacy has an important role in the effectiveness of nursing care of patients, it is not clear how clinical settings empower nursing students in an appropriate way. Therefore, the present study was performed to determine the empowering condition of the hospitals under the affiliation of BUMS from nursing interns 'point of views in the school of Nursing and Midwifery. 
Materials and Methods: In this descriptive cross-sectional study, 33 nursing interns in Nursing and Midwifery faculty of Birjand were studied in a census in the spring of 2012. Means of gathering data were the standard questionnaire, Scott & Jaffe workplace empowerment questionnaire consisting of 38 statements and 9 subscales, on Likert 4 scales. The obtained data was analysed by means of SPSS software (V:17), statistical tests, independent t and Pearson's correlation coefficient at the significant level P < 0.05. 
Results: Mean of total score was 2.26±0.34 and the value of subscales (objective clarity, fair behavior, understanding and appreciation, teamwork, cooperation, workplace health) was at a moderate level.  Mean score of communication and education was low. Mean score of empowerment in communication significantly differed with native status (P=0.035). Mean score of fair behavior statistically had a significant difference with residence (P=0.046). Mean score of healthy workplace (P=0.039) and cooperation (P=0.033), too, had a statistically negative relationship with age and health significantly differed with age. 
Conclusion: The results showed that empowerment of university hospitals was average for students. It sounds that educational managers should make interns aware of the programs and objectives of the hospital and orientate them towards workplace; and make use of their views in group activities and treatment decisions. 

