Background. The incidence of coronary artery spasm in oriental patients is higher than that in western patients. Oriental patients with variant angina (VA) frequently show normal or insignificant coronary artery stenosis by angiogram, compared with western patients. The prevalence of migraine and Raynaud's phenomenon in oriental patients with VA has not yet reported. Objective. We did a prospective study on the prevalence of migraine and Raynaud's phemonenon in patients with proven VA compared with those in two control groups using a radioisotope technique following ice water exposure. Simultaneously, we studied lipid profiles of each group. Methods and results. migraine was diagnosed if the score in part A totalled 7 or more of 26, and Raynaud's phemonenon was diagnosed if the score in part B totalled 4 or more of 11 by Miller et al. Technetium-99m-labeled red blood cells (99mTc-RBC) radionuclide angiography was performed in all patients. Patients were included in a prospective protocol. Patients were grouped as follows: Group I: 20 patients with proven VA; Group II: 30 patients with coronary artery disease; Group III: 31 patients without heart disease. Age and sex of patients were not statistically different among the three groups. Migraine was diagnosed in 8 patients (40.0%) of group I and in 6 patients (20.0%) of group II and in 12 patients (38.7%) of group III. Raynaud's phemonenon was reported in 2 (10.0%) of the patients in group I and in 5 (16.1%) of the patients of group III. The mean index ratio of the digital blood flow of right over left hand on static image was 0.85 ± 0.07 (mean ± S.E.M.) of the patients of group I, 0.73 ± 0.03 of the patients of group II and 0.74 ± 0.04 of the patients of group III. The mean flow index ratio of right over left hand of the digital blood flow on dynamic study was 0.51 of the patients of group I, 0.43 of the patients of group II and 0.43 of the patients of group III. The score of migraine did not differ significantly among the three groups. The score of Raynaud's phenomenon of patients with variant angina did not differ significantly from that of patients in the non-coronary control group, although it differed significantly from that of patients in the coronary control group. But, the prevalence of migraine and Raynaud's phemonenon (questionnaire and radionuclide angiography) in patients of group I did not differ significantly from that in groups II and III. In the end, more patients with variant angina than coronary or non-coronary control group did not reach the predetermined point level for the diagnosis of migraine and Raynaud's phenomenon. Lipid profiles were not significantly different among three groups. Conclusions. This result suggests that variant angina may not be a manifestation of a generalized vasospastic disorder in Korean patients.
