Background: Despite the increasing number of reports on lipomatous hypertrophy of interatrial septum, a standardization of measurement of the dimensions of the interatrial septum (IAS) in the different phases of cardiac cycle has not been reported. Moreover, no data on modification of thickness with age and in specific cardiac diseases are available. Objective:  Our purpose was to study whether the changes of thickness and thinning of IAS may be related to age, left atrial dimension, cardiac cycle and different cardiac diseases. Methods:  248 patients (mean age 52.7 ± 19.9 years) underwent transthoracic (TTE) and transesophageal (TEE) echocardiography. IAS was measured at the constant regions anterior and posterior to the fossa ovalis. IAS thickness (tk), thinning (th) and % thinning (% th) were measured. Results:  IAS thickness ranged from 4 to 13 mm at the time of ventricular end-systolic phase (mean 6.7 ± 1.9 mm) and from 6 to 16 mm at the time of atrial systole (mean 9.9 ± 1.8 mm); significant statistical difference between these values was found (P  < 0.01). IAS thinning ranged from 1 to 7 mm (mean 3.42 ± 1.8) while % IAS thinning from 18 to 76% (mean 36.53 ± 16.36%). Statistical analysis showed a significant positive correlation between age and ventricular end-systolic thickness and atrial systolic thickness and thinning. An insignificant correlation was found between age and % IAS thinning and between left atrial dimension and IAS tk and th. Conclusions:  Our results demonstrate that IAS thickness increases by age; no correlation exists between IAS thinning and age. There is no difference between IAS thickness and thinning in patients with or without cardiac disease. We believe that the thickness of IAS can be considered hypertrophic only if it exceeds the value of 15 mm during both ventricular end-systolic and atrial systolic phases of the cardiac cycle. IAS thickness and thinning might be an additional parameter to evaluate systolic atrial function particulary with regard to maintenance of synus rhythm after conversion from atrial fibrillation as well as to better understand its role in determining the filling of ventricles in different clinical conditions.
