Objective: We evaluated the diagnostic value of response of left and right ventricular ejection fraction and wall motion to exercise using electron beam computed tomography. Methods and results: We attempted to determine the value of exercise electron beam computed tomography for detecting coronary artery disease, including evaluation of the right ventricular ejection fraction and wall motion abnormalities. A study of 35 patients undergoing electron beam tomography exercise cine studies and coronary artery angiography for the evaluation of chest pain was performed. Of the 18 patients with significant coronary disease (≥50% luminal diameter stenosis in at least one coronary artery), 17 (94%) had failure to increase global left ventricular ejection fraction with exercise. Fourteen of 18 (78%) developed a wall motion abnormality during peak exercise, and eight (44%) developed a regional right ventricular wall motion abnormality during peak exercise. Of the 17 patients without obstructive disease, 14 (82%) had a increase in ejection fraction ≥5% and none had an abnormal response in left ventricular wall motion during peak exercise (specificity=100%). The change in right ventricular ejection fraction with exercise was not a significant predictor of obstructive coronary disease in this study (P=NS). Using different criteria during stress to predict coronary disease, the accuracy was 89% (31/35) using an increase of <5% in ejection fraction, 89% (31/35) using the development of a new or worsened wall motion abnormality, and 91% (32/35) using both left ventricular criteria. Conclusion: Our study suggests that exercise electron beam computed tomography appears to be a useful tool for the detection of coronary disease. A increase of <5% in ejection fraction and abnormal left ventricular response to exercise were important predictors, while the exercise induced changes of right ventricular ejection fraction was not a significant predictor of obstructive disease. Both left and right ventricular wall motion abnormalities are useful and important parameters in identifying patients with obstructive disease from those with normal coronary arteries.
