Background: A major cause of morbidity in type I diabetes is congestive heart failure due predominantly to left ventricular diastolic dysfunction. The mechanism of diastolic dysfunction remains unknown and does not relate to blood pressure, microvascular complications and glycated haemoglobin. Hyperglycaemia is the hallmark of diabetes and is a potential determinant of left ventricular diastolic dysfunction. Objective: To determine whether acute hyperglycaemia can induce changes in left ventricular diastolic function in normal subjects similar to those observed in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM). Design: Cross-sectional study. Setting: London teaching hospital. Subjects: Sixteen twins from eight identical twin pairs discordant for IDDM (age 18–38 years, five male) were studied; none had a history or evidence of myocardial ischaemia, valvular or primary heart muscle disease, systemic hypertension or nephropathy. Interventions: Non-diabetic twins underwent a hyperglycaemic clamp at 10 mmol/l. Main outcome measures: Doppler echocardiography was performed in basal condition in identical twin pairs discordant for IDDM and repeated in the non-diabetic twins during hyperglycaemia. Blood glucose, insulin and catecholamines were measured at baseline and during hyperglycaemia. Results: Transmitral Doppler E/A velocity ratio was significantly lower in diabetic than non-diabetic twins at baseline (1.44 (0.38) vs. 1.51 (0.19), P<0.05). Glucose infusion in the non-diabetic twins resulted in an increase in their E/A ratio (1.51 (0.19) vs. 1.82 (0.47), P<0.05) due to an increase in E velocity (68 (12) to 64.7 (10.7), P<0.05) and a decrease in the peak A velocity (42.7 (3.85) to 38.0 (4.1), P<0.05). No significant changes were observed in peak E velocity or isovolumic relaxation time in the non-diabetic twins between baseline and hyperglycaemia. Conclusions:The alterations in left ventricular diastolic function induced by acute hyperglycaemia and consequent increase in plasma catecholamines do not mimic those demonstrated in IDDM patients.
