Objective: To compare resting long axis echocardiography with adenosine thallium-201 emission tomography in detecting myocardial ischaemic abnormalities and surgical related risk in patients before peripheral vascular surgery. Design: A prospective and blinded pre-operative examination of resting left ventricular minor and long axes and myocardial perfusion during adenosine vasodilation using thallium-201 emission tomography. Setting: A tertiary referral centre for cardiac and vascular disease equipped with invasive, non-invasive and surgical facilities. Subjects: 65 patients (40 male) with significant peripheral vascular disease, mean age 63±10 (S.D.) years, and 21 normal subjects of similar age. Results: Thallium-201 myocardial perfusion tomography was abnormal in 50/65 patients; 27 had fixed, 23 reversible abnormalities (19 of whom had both). Long axis was considered abnormal if one or more of two systolic long axis disturbances, reduced extent of total excursion <1 cm at any of the three (left, septal and posterior left ventricular) sites or prolonged shortening >1 mm after A2, and two diastolic abnormalities, delayed onset of lengthening >80 ms after A2 or reduced peak lengthening velocity <4.5 cm/s, was present. Long axis score (maximum 12) was based on the presence or absence of these four disturbances at each of the three sites. Myocardial perfusion imaging with thallium-201 classified the patients into three different groups according to their liability to low, moderate or high surgical risk (summed stress perfusion score of 36). Thirteen of 50 patients were identified as subjects at high surgical risk, with a perfusion score of 22/36 and below. Twelve of these demonstrated significantly greater impairment of systolic and diastolic long axis function, compared to those at low surgical risk, with a total long axis echo score of 6/12 or more. Seventeen of 18 patients identified as being at low surgical risk, with a perfusion score of 32/36 and above, had total long axis score of less than 6/12. The remaining 19 moderate risk patients had a wide range of long axis scores. In the 65 patients studied there were two post-operative deaths, one post-discharge death due to cerebrovascular accident, and one due to renal failure. Conclusion: The combination of both systolic and diastolic long axis disturbances in patients with peripheral vascular disease can be used to predict the thallium assessment of surgical risk. Long axis echocardiography may thus have value as a screening test before non-cardiac surgery as well as providing a means of monitoring myocardial perfusion.
