Objective: The purpose of this study was to determine the characteristics and predictive value of the variability of coupling interval of ventricular premature beats (VPBs) for cardiac mortality in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD). Background: Frequent VPBs have been linked to an increased risk for cardiac death in patients with coronary artery disease. It is unknown whether analysis of coupling interval of VPBs from ambulatory ECG recordings can be used for risk statification in these patients. Methods: In 78 consecutive symptomatic patients with documented CAD who presented with frequent VPBs (>720/24 h), the analysis of VPBs' coupling interval (SDNV) was performed. Left ventricular function, ventricular arrhythmias and simple measures of heart rate variability were assessed. Mean follow-up was 702±329 days. Cardiac mortality was the primary end-point of the study. Results: During follow-up, 14 patients died—11 deaths were cardiac. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF)<40%; no β-blocker treatment and digoxin use were clinical variables showing a significant association with cardiac mortality. The presence of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (nsVT), especially if more than five episodes were present; short mean sinus cycle (<750 ms) and SDNV were associated with cardiac deaths. Mean SDNV was 79±29 in victims and 63±29 in survivors (p<0.05). Univariate Cox regression analysis revealed that the presence of SDNV>80 ms carried a relative risk of 6.7 for cardiac mortality. The adjusted relative risk was 13.3 for nsVT and 4.4 for SDNV>80 ms. Among patients with nsVT, mortality rate was significantly higher with SDNV>80 ms (58%), compared to lower SDNV (14%, p<0.01). Sixty-four percent mortality rate was observed in patients with LVEF<40%, presence of nsVT and SDNV>80 ms, compared to 17% in similar patients with lower SDNV (p<0.05). Conclusion: The analysis of coupling interval of ventricular premature beats form the same 24-h ECG recordings may complement the standard Holter analysis for risk stratification. This seems especially promising in the subgroups of patients at highest risk—those with LV systolic dysfunction, non-sustained VT or both.
