Introduction & Objective: Initial information is necessary for decision  and policy making. A weak information system leads to poor decision-making but the accuracy of data registration and collection can be a valid supporter for assessing health system and management deci-sions in programming. For the first time, we checked the accuracy of the data col-lected from the households in the health centers in Hamadan
Materials & Methods: In this field study, 1825 household files selected by two-stage sampling were included in census of 2011. To access to the households' files, among 19 health centers which have health homes, nine centers were randomly chosen, and then sample size was divided by proportional stratified sampling. After determination of the list of households, the researchers extracted households’ information from family files. Then we visited the se-lected households to assess the accuracy of the data registration.
Results: Based on the results, most misreporting and registration problems were observed in birth date (n=122 or 6.68%), backyard status of their houses (n=103 or 5.67%), smoking status of the participants (n=98 or 5.37%) and level of education (n=89 or 4.88 percent), re-spectively. In this study, the lowest rate of inaccuracy in registration of data was observed in follow-up care of tuberculosis patients (n=1 or 0.06%), vaccination program follow-up  for children under 6 years (n=3 or 0.17%) and female population residing in the households (n=4 or 0.22%), respectively. The results showed that the overall accuracy of the collected data was 98.22%.
Conclusion: In the current system of health statistics of Hamadan, data collection are done based on forms, in  which  the definitions of some terms may be  unclear, or the interviewers  may have different interpretations of the definitions . Comparing the results of this study with those of other studies indicates that the accuracy rate of data collection and registration in Hamadan health centers  is relatively high.
 (Sci J Hamadan Univ Med Sci 2013; 20 (2):143-149)
