To investigate effects of supplementation of folic acid on the expression of adhesion molecules VCAM-1 in the aortas of rats with hyperhomocysteinemia. Thirty male SD rats (200 ± 20 g) were invided into 3 groups (n = 10 for each group): control group(Control), high Met group(Met) and Met plus Folate group(Met + Folate), fed. for 45 days.

Plasma Hcy levels were higher with the high-methionine diet (140.68 ± 36.87 μmol/L vs 6.47 ± 1.10 μmol/L in control rats) an effect which was reduced by folate. Respectively, the aortic expression of adhesion molecules VCAM-1 at protein and mRNA levels were higher in the Met groups than those in the control groups or the Met + Folate groups.

A high methionine diet for 45 days was sufficient to induce hyperhomocysteinemia. Folate supplementation prevented elevation of Hcy levels in the blood, and reduced expression of the adhesion molecule VCAM-1.

Hyperhomocysteinemia is now regarded as one of the important risk factors for cardiovascular and cerebralvascular disorders.[Welch GN, Loscalzo J. Homocysteine and atherothrombosis. N Engl J Med 1998; 38(15):1042-50.] Several plausible mechanisms for Hcy-induecd atherosclerosis have been proposed. These include endothelial dysfunction, enhancement of oxidative stress, reduction in NO bioavailability, and augmentation of thrombus formation.[Holven KB, Holm T, Aukrust P, et al. Effect of folic acid treatment on endothelium-dependent vasodilation and nitric oxide-derived end products in hyperhomocysteinemic subjects . Am J Med 2001;110(7):536-42; Guba SC, Fonseca V, Fink LM. Hyperhomocysteinemia and thrombosis. Semin Thromb Hemost 1999;25(3):291-309.] However, the precise molecular mechanism is still unclear.

Recent reports have suggested a role for inflammatory processes in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.[Gerard C, Rollins BJ. Chemokines and disease. Nat Immunol 2001;2(2):108-15.] Dysfunction of endothelial cells is the key process promoting inflammatory reactions. On injury, endothlial cells are capable of producing various cytokines that participate in inflammatory reactions in the arterial wall.

Although results from in vitro studies suggest that Hcy, at pathophysiological concentrations, stimulates chemokine expression in vascular cells, it is unknown whether hyperhomocysteinemia can initiate similar changes, leading to enhanced momocyte adhesion/binding to the vascular endothelium in vivo.[Zeng X, Dai J, Remick DG, Wang X. Homocysteine mediated expression and secretion of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 and interleukin-8 in human monocytes. Circ Res 2003;93(4):311-20.] On the basis of the potential pathogenic role of chemokines in atherogenesis, the objective of the present study was to investigate that homocsteine may exert its effect in part though adhesion molecules VCAM-1 and that folic acid supplementation may downregulate these inflammatory responses.

Male Sprague–Dawley rats (bred from animal centers of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong Science and Technology University) aged 8 weeks were divided into 3 groups(n = 10 for each group) and maintained for 45 days on the following diets before the experiments: (1) regular diet; (2) high-metheionine diet, consisting of regular diet plus 1.7% methionine; and (3) high-methionine plus folate -rich diet, consisting of regular diet plus 1.7% methionine and 0.006% folate.[Boisvert WA, Curtiss LK, Terkeltaub RA. Interleukin-8 and its receptor CXCR2 in atherosclerosis. Immunol Res 2000;21(2-3):129-d37.] Plasma and serum samples wee colleced and stored at − 80 °C after 45 days until analysis. The plasma homocysteine concentration of rats in three groups were determined by high-pressue liquid chromatography. To detect the endothelial expression of adhesion molecules VCAM-1, the thoracic aorta was isolated and dived into segments. These segments were immersion-fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin overlight and then embedded in paraffin. Sequential 5 μm paraffin-embedded cross sections were prepared. Immunohistochemical analyisis was performed to detect vascular cell adhesion molecule(VCAM)-1, The fixed cryosections were immediately blcked in 10% horse serum and phosphate baffered saline(PBS) at room temperature for 30 min. Goat polyclonal andibodies against rat VCAM-1(Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were diluted 1 : 100 in PBS and incubated with the cryosections for 1 h of room temperature. After three washes, the sections were incubated with biotin-conjugated rabbit anti-goat immunoglobulins(Dako) at 1 : 250 dilution in PBS. After three washes, the samples were mounted in 90% glycerol-PBS. Photographs were taken by use of a light microscope at a mignification of × 200.
