Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) is a transboundary, economically devastating and highly contagious viral disease
of livestock, most importantly cattle, buffalo and pig. The disease also affects goats, sheep, wild ruminant species and
elephants. The causative FMD virus is antigenically diverse having seven distinct serotypes and many variants within them.
Being a single stranded RNAvirus, it confirms the quasispecies nature with emergences and reemergences of different genetic
lineages with altered antigenicity within the serotypes, making vaccination based control programme a high cost effective,
time consuming and difficult to achieve. As per the OIE and FAO, the disease is a major threat to food security of the world, and
particularly the countries having the disease are more prone to food insecurity. Further, FMD free status is an indicator of
development, and all developed countries are free from it. The disease is endemic in India and three serotypes of the virus viz;
O,Aand Asia1 are circulating. Annual direct loss due toFMDin India has been estimated at Rs. 20,000 crores. Many countries
in the world are now free fromFMDwith or without vaccination and presence of the disease in other neighboring countries is a
major threat to them. Countries having FMD face trade barrier posed by FMD free countries, causing heavy economic loss to
the livestock industry. Progressive control pathway has been developed by FAO for global eradication of FMD. Vaccination
based FMD control programme is in operation in India which involves biannual vaccinations of all cattle and buffaloes in
selected areas, regular active surveillance and antibody monitoring in vaccinated population with the objective of creating
FMD free zones. At present, the disease occurrence, severity of the clinical disease and number of outbreaks have progressively
and substantially declined in the control zones as a result of last 10 rounds of vaccination with an oil adjuvanted trivalent
inactivated vaccine. In this review, FMD scenario in India and in the world is briefed. Besides, the measures taken for the
control and eradication of this devastating disease is presented. Besides, the initial success achieved through the FMD control
programme in India, a road map for the control and eradication of FMD at national level is discussed.
