Background & Objective: One goal of education is to prepare students to deal with future issues and to be innovative. Therefore, the issues related to their learning be focused on and strengthened. This study has been done to evaluate the effect of note taking skills training on the students’ academic self–efficacy.
Methods: This study was done using test method (Pretest, posttest with control group). The statistical society included the undergraduate students of the School of Literature and Humanities of Shahid Bahonar University of Kerman, Kerman, Iran, and the School of Public Health of Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Iran (2009-2010). The study sample included 110 undergraduate students; 55 in the experimental group (30 cases of literature and 25 cases of Public Health) and 55 in the control group (30 cases of literature and 25 cases of Public Health). The samples were selected by a single-stage cluster sampling method. For data collection the Morgan-Jinks Student Efficacy Scale (MJSES) was used. The pre-test was conducted in the two groups before the training. The note taking skills training program was carried out in the experimental group in seven 2 hour sessions once a week. The test groups were given the post-test after completing the course. T-test and the covariance analysis were used for data analysis.
Results: Findings showed that academic self-efficacy significantly increased after note-taking training in tested groups (P  <  0.005). Moreover, the comparison of the two colleges showed that teaching these skills had a significant relationship with academic self-efficacy of students of the School of Health (P  <  0.005), but no significant relationship was found with the students of the School of Literature and Humanities (P  >  0.005).
Conclusion: Due to the positive impact of note-taking skills training, it seems that educational practitioners must invest more in the training of this skill and university’s professors, as individuals influencing students, should include note-taking skills in their academic courses to facilitate the teaching and learning process of these skills.
Key Words: Training, Note taking skills, Academic self-efficacy, Learning


