 Urban environment is complex, dynamic, and versatile. It is considered as a source of development that requires high capacity management. The urban good governing pattern is defined as the participatory process of development that allows all the beneficiaries such as the government, NGOs and civil society to find solutions for urban problems. In this pattern, the direct executing responsibility of the urban management decreases and more opportunities for bottom-up planning and control by NGOs and public institutions are provided. This article aims to Measure the level of public participation in urban management of Yasouj based on urban good governing pattern. It has also examined the significant relationship between the indicators of urban good governing (transparency and accountability, social justice, civic awareness, social confidence, efficiency and effectiveness) as the independent variables with the dependent variable of public participation in urban management. The research methodology is descriptive-analytic and the data are collected doing survey methods by questionnaire. The data were analyzed using SPSS. The article sample size was calculated 320 persons by using the formula of Cochran. The results showed high tendency among Yasuj citizens to participate in urban management related activities (development, environmental, welfare, and urban services activities). Pearson’s test was used to examine the meaningful relation of public participation both from subjective viewpoint and in urban management of Yasuj city. Taking into account the result of the test (0.000  < P), the significant relation was confirmed; as the test results was less than significant level in the test, that is 0.01 (a = 0.01). Thus, there is a significant relation between citizens' attitude and their participation in urban management affairs. Four indices were used to test the level of participation from objective viewpoint: Urban income and expenditure, supervision and criticism on the performance of urban management, membership in social foundations and organizations, and status of cooperation and participation in urban planning. The results in this regard showed low level of participation from objective viewpoint so that the majority of the citizens had no participation; and only 18.05% reported to have high level of participation. The results concerning correlation test of decent urban governance and public participation was positive and direct in the variables in such a way that, the higher the rate of independent variables (decent urban governance), the higher the rate of participation of citizens in urban management. Among the said criteria, the citizenship awareness showed strong and significant relation with the variables of urban management (about 80%). However, correlation of other criteria with urban participation variables was not considerable.
