Rural areas are the residential and productive places that have organic relationships with natural، ecological، economical، social and cultural patterns. Meanwhile، due to the recent changes of economical، social and cultural patterns and also entrance of new technologies in Iran and hence Fars province، rural housing architecture has drastically changed. Our initial investigations revealed that as a result of such changes، the rural sense of the villages in Fars province has altered as well. However, one of the main objectives of this paper is to present the key factors affecting the rural housing architecture in Fars province. 
Fars is one of the provinces in Iran with a vast variety of rural architecture in its different villages. Therefore، to reach our goals، firstly، we have listed all the villages in Fars with more than 90 families which have been constructed at least fifty years ago، as our target population. Then، with SPSS software and based on the several meteorological data that were gathered from all 24 weather stations in Fars and with the q-mode cluster analysis، Fars province has been divided to five main ecological zones. Finally with the cluster sampling method، 60 villages from the initial list have been selected from those five ecological zones as our clusters. Accordingly we have analyzed the housing architecture in these villages through different methods such as direct observation، filling questioners، interviews and mapping the houses. 
Our investigations in those 60 sample villages have confirmed that the new housing architecture in the villages of Fars province has hardly been influenced by their traditional rural architecture. In most cases their new architecture is a bad copy of their neighbor’s urban one. This study also leads us to understand the traditional rural housing architecture in Fars province and hence has introduced some main recommendations related to their new housings. Moreover، a range of practical strategies for housing construction and preserving the identity of villages are obtained in this study.
To reach such an objective، this paper will address: 
(1) The current condition of rural housing architecture in Fars province;
 (2) Some key factors affecting the rural housing architecture in different parts of Fars province;
(3) Comparative analysis of housing architecture in different ecological zones of Fars province to find criteria for future designs in such zones; 
(4) Several guidelines for rural housing constructions; and
(5) Essential readings for rural planners، architects and local and national government officers.

