 After the Islamic revolution occurred in early 1980s in Iran, planning for improvement of housing condition in rural areas became one the most important concerns for the Iranian governments due to the incommensurate and substandard housing in rural areas and several development plans were employed. Therefore, rural access to financial resources is one of the major categories that can lead to sustainable development in rural communities and since the end of the third development plan, the government has allocated these funds to the villagers and has given the micro-credit to them in great scale to achieve this goal, but the question is that “how much did these funds improve the life quality in rural areas?". This note aims to provide procedural information, additional to that contained in the Council’s adopted SPG on affordable housing, on making an application for planning permission for local needs of affordable housing in or adjacent to villages by Housing Improvement Funds.
In the present research, several ideas such as the role of micro-credit have been studied on the Improving of rural life quality in four dimensions of social, economic, physical and environmental. The objective of the present study is to evaluate the effects of the credits on above dimensions. Data collection used in the study is “library and field method” (questionnaires, interviews and observation). Data collection methodology is descriptive-analytical research (mean and standard deviation) and inferential statistics (Friedman test, linear regression, coefficient correlation and Willcoxon test). The sample size consists of the villages above 20 households in rural area of Mo'jezat rural district who received micro-credit from 2005 to 2011, and the project covered about 1428 households that were selected using classification and probability sampling. Cochran method was used to determine sample size which was estimated to be 225 household. Among the 4 factors examined in this process, the most important factor was the physical aspect or the obtained results in this research show that the micro-credit has the most effect on the physical aspect and the least effect on the economic and its indicators.

