Urbanization and besides it, the urbanization requirements are the basic reason of environmental changes. This approach is the result of historical-geographical complexity and it has caused the uncontrolled urban expansion and demolition of green spaces and agriculture lands and caused the removal of urban beauty and nature and has expanded the city and indicate clearly the social- economical, cultural and ecological problems which not only has made regional changes, but also has caused the environmental changes and disturbance of ecological balance in the world. The objective of this research is reviewing, analyzing and study of urban green space demolition in Tabriz city and sprawl development of Tabriz in time series of 16 years (1989-2005) and study of different effective factors on them which Satellite images of these periods are the main tools for this research. Inappropriate expansion of construction in Tabriz city has caused the destruction of green spaces and agricultural lands in the recent decades. This expansion has caused the reduction and limitation of access to green spaces from two aspects. On one hand, the change of agricultural lands and gardens around the city has minimized the ecological power of the urban environment, and on the other hand, changing the usages of green spaces inside the cities and changing the lands allocated to green spaces in to profitable land uses, has increasingly limited the mental - social power of urban spaces. The results indicate that the satellite images are the appropriate tools for evaluating the amount of development changes and land demolition changes, and it is possible to determine the urban land use changes by satellite images for different periods. By using Heldren model, it is possible to determine the Physical growth of city based on population, uncontrolled, unbalanced and sprawl growth, which the results obtained for Tabriz city shows the unbalanced and horizontal growth of the city. Based on ratification of Commission article 5 of Tabriz city for years 2006 and 2007, more than 65 hectares of Tabriz green spaces have been changed to other land uses. The continuation of this situation and the lack of appropriate management systems for protecting the green spaces, the sustainable development will face with a serious risk in Tabriz city. 
