Studies carried out in the avian embryo and based on the construction of quail-chick chimeras have shown that
most of the skull and all the facial and visceral skeleton are derived from the cephalic neural crest (NC). Contribution
of the mesoderm is limited to its occipital and (partly) to its otic domains. NC cells (NCCs) participating in membrane
bones and cartilages of the vertebrate head arise from the diencephalon (posterior half only), the
mesencephalon and the rhombencephalon. They can be divided into an anterior domain (extending down to r2
included) in which genes of the Hox clusters are not expressed (Hox-negative skeletogenic NC) and a posterior
domain including r4 to r8 in which Hox genes of the four first paraloguous groups are expressed. The NCCs that
form the facial skeleton belong exclusively to the anterior Hox-negative domain and develop from the first
branchial arch (BA1). This rostral domain of the crest is designated as FSNC for facial skeletogenic neural crest.
Rhombomere 3 (r3) participates modestly to both BA1 and BA2. Forced expression of Hox genes (Hoxa2, Hoxa3 and
Hoxb4) in the neural fold of the anterior domain inhibits facial skeleton development. Similarly, surgical excision
of these anterior Hox-negative NCCs results in the absence of facial skeleton, showing that Hox-positive NCCs
cannot replace the Hox-negative domain for facial skeletogenesis. We also show that excision of the FSNC results
in dramatic down-regulation of Fgf8 expression in the head, namely in ventral forebrain and in BA1 ectoderm. We
have further demonstrated that exogenous FGF8 applied to the presumptive BA1 territory at the 5-6-somite stage
(5-6ss) restores to a large extent facial skeleton development. The source of the cells responsible for this regeneration
was shown to be r3, which is at the limit between the Hox-positive and Hox-negative domain. NCCs that
respond to FGF8 by survival and proliferation are in turn necessary for the expression/maintenance of Fgf8 expression
in the ectoderm. These results strongly support the emerging picture according to which the processes underlying
morphogenesis of the craniofacial skeleton are regulated by epithelial-mesenchymal bidirectional crosstalk.
