We examined the utility of using genera and families as surrogates of species-level assemblage patterns. We assessed cross-taxonomic level congruence, as well as taxonomic structure–environment and taxon richness–environment relationships in stream macroinvertebrate and diatom data surveyed across Finland. A number of interesting and important findings emerged from our analyses. For both macroinvertebrates and diatoms, species richness was strongly correlated with genus and family richness, and similarities in assemblage structure between species-, genus- and family-level matrices were also significant and relatively strong. For macroinvertebrates, the key environmental variables for assemblage structure and taxon richness remained the same irrespective of taxonomic level. For diatoms, however, the environmental variables related to variation in diatom taxon richness varied between taxonomic data sets, while determinants of assemblage structure remained largely the same. For macroinvertebrates, relatively similar amounts of variation in assemblage structure and taxon richness for species-, genus-, and family-level data were accounted for by the environmental variables, shared environmental and spatial variables, spatial variables, and total variation explained. By contrast, for diatoms, these components of variability differed somewhat between taxonomic levels. Our results suggest that, for macroinvertebrates, even family-level data could be used in rapid biodiversity assessments, where the objective is to examine biodiversity patterns and rank sites according to their conservation value in our study region. Families might also perform well in this task in other regions that are characterized by low faunal species diversity, but the situation is likely to be different for regions with higher species diversity. Although weaker than the relationships in macroinvertebrate data, species-level data for diatoms also showed rather similar patterns to genus- and family-level data. However, due to the low number of diatom families, it is likely that families do not provide enough variability in biodiversity patterns. Thus, for diatoms, genus-level data could perhaps be more efficient than family-level data in correlating with species-level data and portraying assemblage patterns for conservation purposes.
