Network security depends on a number of factors. And a common
characteristic of these factors is that they are dynamic in nature. Such factors
include new vulnerabilities and threats, the network policy structure and traffic.
These factors can be divided into two broad categories. Network risk and service
risk. As the name implies, the former one corresponds to risk associated with the
network policy whereas the later one depends on the services and software running
on the system. Therefore, evaluating security from both the service and policy
perspective can allow the management system to make decisions regarding how a
system should be changed to enhance security as par the management objective.
Such decision making includes choosing between alternative security architectures,
designing security countermeasures, and to systematically modify security configurations
to improve security. As there may be real time changes to the network
threat, this evaluation must be done dynamically to handle such changes. In this
paper, we provide a security metric framework that quantifies objectively the most
significant security risk factors, which include existing vulnerabilities, historical
trend of vulnerabilities of the remotely accessible services, prediction of potential
vulnerabilities for these services and their estimated severity, unused address spaceand finally propagation of an attack within the network. These factors cover both the
service aspect and the network aspect of risk toward a system. We have implemented
this framework as a user-friendly tool called Risk based prOactive seCurity
cOnfiguration maNAger (ROCONA) and showed how this tool simplifies security
configuration management of services and policies in a system using risk measurement
and mitigation. We also combine all the components into one single
metric and present validation experiments using real-life vulnerability data from
National Vulnerability Database (NVD) and show comparison with two existing
risk measurement tools
