The present study was undertaken with the objective of evaluating plastic as an alternative material for biogas plant on a par with
conventional brick material. The field study was carried out for one year (October, 2005–September, 2006) in a small hamlet at Nilgiris
incorporating solar energy to study its influence on biogas production. During summer (April–June) the temperature reaches to the
maximum of 21–25  C and the minimum of 10–12  C. During winter (October–December), the temperature available is maximum of
16–21  C and minimum of 2  C. The solar insolation in the study area ranges from 250 to 600 W/m2. This study involves the control
conventional Deenabandhu model (Indian standard model prevailing in most part of India made of masonry structure only) and the
experimental plastic tank with greenhouse canopy of similar capacity. Our previous work [Vinoth Kumar, K., Kasturi Bai, R., 2005.
Plastic biodigesters – a systematic study. Energy for Sustainable Development 9 (4), 40–49] on lab scale digester made from plastic material
was compared over other materials and the results gave us much confidence to carry out further study on pilot scale. In continuation,
a semi-continuous study was conducted for one year with the retention time of 55 days. The gas generated from the biogas plants was
utilized for cooking (burner) and lighting (lamp) purposes. The yearly average slurry temperatures recorded during the study period was
26.3 and 22.4  C in experimental and control biogas plants against ambient temperature of 17.0  C. The yearly average greenhouse chamber
temperature recorded was 29.1  C in the experimental biogas plant. The yearly average gas yield from the experimental and control
biogas plants were 39.1 and 34.6 l kg 1 day 1 respectively. Gas productions in the winter season registered lower than other months. It
can be concluded that the solar greenhouse assisted plastic biogas plant can be efficiently adopted with minor modifications in hilly
regions since the temperature profile plays a major role in biogas production.
  2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
