Disadvantages of frozen doughs are their variable performance and loss of stability over long-term frozen storage. Changes in rheological properties of frozen doughs have been reported to be due to the physical damage of the gluten network caused by ice crystallization and recrystallization. The objective of this study was to determine the effect of hydrophilic gums on ice crystallization and recrystallization for improvement of the shelf-life stability of frozen dough. The present research involved use of the Hard Red Spring wheat cultivar Grandin and hydrophilic gums such as carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), gum arabic, kappa carrageenan ((kappa)-carrageenan), and locust bean gum at three different levels each on doughs stored frozen for up to 16 weeks. The dough characteristics were analyzed after day 0, day 1, and after 4, 8, 12, and 16 weeks of frozen storage using data from differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), water activity, extensigraph, and proof time. The (delta)H value of freezable water endothermic transitions obtained using DSC increased with storage time for all treatments. However, addition of different levels of the four gums lowered the (delta)H value, indicating a decrease in freezable water. Doughs with locust bean gum gave a higher peak force, measured using the Kieffer dough extensibility rig of the texture analyzer, and lower proof time, indicating better retention of baking quality. Maximum resistance to extension increased upon addition of 1 and 3% CMC; 1 and 3% (kappa)-carrageenan; and 1, 2, and 3% locust bean gum as compared with the control. The various periods of storage or gum treatments did not affect the water activity of the thawed frozen doughs. Doughs with locust bean gum gave significantly lower proof time compared with the other treatments and the control. CMC gave the second lowest values, followed by gum arabic treatment. Addition of kappa-carrageenan increased the proof time compared with the control. In summary, locust bean gum, gum arabic, and CMC improved the dough characteristics to varying degrees. (kappa)-Carrageenan was the only gum that showed a detrimental effect on frozen dough.
