The objective of this study is to suggest a mathematical model and an optimal algorithm for determining the height of apartment
buildings to satisfy the solar rights of survey buildings or survey housing units. The objective is also to develop an automatic computation
model for the optimum height of apartment buildings and then to clarify the performance and expected effects. To accomplish
the objective of this study, the following procedures were followed:
(1) The necessity of the height planning of obstruction buildings to satisfy the solar rights of survey buildings or survey housing units
is demonstrated by analyzing through a literature review the recent trend of disputes related to solar rights and to examining the
social requirements in terms of solar rights. In addition, the necessity of the automatic computation system for height planning of
apartment buildings is demonstrated and a suitable analysis method for this system is chosen by investigating the characteristics of
analysis methods for solar rights assessment.
(2) A case study on the process of height planning of apartment buildings will be briefly described and the problems occurring in this
process will then be examined carefully.
(3) To develop an automatic computation model for height planning of apartment buildings, geometrical elements forming apartment
buildings are defined by analyzing the geometrical characteristics of apartment buildings. In addition, design factors and
regulations required in height planning of apartment buildings are investigated. Based on this knowledge, the methodology and
mathematical algorithm to adjust the height of apartment buildings by automatic computation are suggested and probable problems
and the ways to resolve these problems are discussed. Finally, the methodology and algorithm for the optimization are
suggested.(4) Based on the suggested methodology and mathematical algorithm, the automatic computation model for optimum height of apartment
buildings is developed and the developed system is verified through the application of some cases. The effects of the suggested
model are then demonstrated quantitatively and qualitatively.
  2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
