Development of follicles in the goat ovary is characterized by the presence of four or more waves of follicular growth
in the same cycle. Dominant follicle features also differ from the ones observed in other species. It has been previously
shown that serum estrone (E1) is the predominant estrogen during puberty and continues being high in the adult female
goat. Serum estradiol (E2) may be beyond the limit of sensitivity of RIA during puberty, but can be measured in the adult
female. The objective of the present study was to investigate the steroid metabolism, focused on the androgens and estrogens
synthesis, of the ovarian follicles of the goat. For this purpose follicles of different sizes (3–9 mm) were dissected from
the ovaries of adult goats and separately dissociated in trypsin. Cells from each follicle were singly incubated in DMEM
plus BSA and 3H-progesterone. Some cells were exposed to hCG or FSH. At the end of the incubation period the media
was obtained, ether-extracted and steroids separated by thin layer chromatography. The methodology used showed that
follicular cells produced androgens (testosterone (T) and androstenedione (A4)), 17 -OHP4 and estrogens (estradiol-17 
(E2) and estrone (E1)). Most follicles responded to hCG and FSH by increasing androgen and estrogen production. Some
follicles produced mainly androgens suggesting they are evolving to atresia. E1/E2 ratio was related to the size of the follicle.
E1 production was higher than E2 production in 3–6mm follicles. The capacity to respond to FSH and hCG suggests the
presence of FSH and hCG receptors in small antral follicles. In conclusion, the present results show that the follicular cells
of the ovary metabolize progesterone to androgens and estrogens. Steroid metabolism studies showed that as it occurs in
other mammals, follicles may undergo atresia at any stage of development. Estrone production was found in most follicles
and was regulated by gonadotropins. Results show that at least, the  4 pathway is active in the ovarian follicles of the adult
goat.
© 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
