The objective of this experiment was to determine the effect of two types of caustic calcinated magnesite (caustic magnesite
(CM) and Agromag (AG)) upon the end products of in vitro fermentation (total gas, methane, total and individual fatty acids,
and VFA) and protozoan population in the rumen fluid collected from sheep. Both magnesium additives (CM and AG) as natural
products in the dose of 0.01 g were added to the fermentation bottles containing rumen inoculum from sheep and different
substrates. Meadow hay (MH), wheat straw (WS), amorphous cellulose (AC) and barley grain (BG) were used as substrates and
incubated with the buffered rumen fluid using an in vitro gas measuring technique during 72 h of incubation. The rumen protozoa,
Entodinium spp., Trichostomatids and large Entodiniomorphids and the total protozoan concentration were counted after 24 h
of incubation. The methane production was significantly decreased with CM or AG, respectively, by 58 or 62% (MH), by 65%
(WS), by 52% (AC) and by 58% (BG). The total VFA concentration was significantly lower compared to control for CM plus
MH, WS, AC, BG and AG plus WS. The total VFA concentration was significantly higher compared to control for AG plus AC.
The effect of the both additives on ciliate population was not uniform and depended on the substrates used and protozoan type.
Ciliate population was significantly increased in Entodinium spp. (AG plus BG) and Diploplastron affinae (CM or AG plus BG)
compared to control. Tested additives significantly decreased population of Entodinium spp. (AG plus MH or AC), Dasytricha
ruminantium (AG plus AC), Ophryoscolex c. tricoronatus, Eremoplastron dilobum and Polyplastron multivesiculatum (CM or
AG plus BG). It can be concluded that both natural magnesium sources influenced rumen fermentation patterns and protozoan
population in vitro depending on the type of the substrate used; therefore, the relative efficacy of individual tested additive cannot
be determined from these experiments. In vivo experiments are required in future.
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
