Histophilus somni (Haemophilus somnus) has been reported as the cause of epididymitis in rams. This bacterium has also
been found in the preputial mucosa of rams without epididymitis lesions. H. somni is a bacterium that is difficult to characterize,
since it is a pleomorphic Gram-negative bacilli of characteristics similar to Actinobacillus seminis, which is also found in
ram epididymitis lesions. The objective of this work was to determine if H. somni (H. somnus) is involved in cases of sheep
epididymitis. A clinical examination was performed in 160 rams, extracting semen by electro-ejaculation of 28 of them, which
had epididymal lesions. The penis was exteriorized in order to avoid prepuce contamination. The semen samples were cultivated
in chocolate agar in a 10% CO2 environment. Two strains were isolated in pure culture with a colony morphology and microscopy
similar to H. somni (H. somnus). These were identified using the API 20 E system, using as a control the reference strain of
H. somnus (2336ATCC). One of the isolates (129H) resulted identical to the reference strain and the other (827) presented
differences in the arginine decarboxylase, H2S, catalase and inositol reactions, although these differences have been reported
(in strains isolated from different geographic origins, animal species and anatomical region). To characterize the isolates, an
electrophoretic analysis of total proteins was performed (PAGE–SDS) finding identical profiles between the reference strain of
H. somnus and isolate 129H and similar in relation to isolate 827. The amplification of a fragment of approximately 407 bp
was observed in the 129H isolate and the ATCC strain, but not in 827. In other samples, isolations were made of Brucella ovis,
Corynebacterium spp., Staphylococcus and other pleomorphic Gram-negative bacilli similar to A. seminis. Therefore, it has
been confirmed that H. somni is present in the reproductive tract of rams and it could be involved in the presentation of ovine
epididymitis. It is important that we underline that this is the first report of H. somni isolation in Mexico from ram semen samples.
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
