Castrated Angora kids (n = 210, initial BW= 25.4±4.0 kg) approximately 7 months of age were used in two consecutive years
(2002 and 2003) to evaluate three production systems and coats in terms of animal performance, carcass traits, mohair production
and quality, and production costs. In both years, half the animals were assigned to an innovative feeding system (RF) that consisted
of an open-sided barn having a raised, slatted floor, and the remaining goats were assigned in equal numbers to traditional feedlot
(FL) and pasture (P) systems. Half the goats in each system were fitted with coats. Treatments and coat groups were blocked by body
weight. The FL and RF goats had ad libitum access to rations formulated to produce high and moderate growth rates, respectively.
Goats in the P treatment were supplemented three times a week to produce moderate growth. After shearing, fleeces were weighed
and fully characterized using objective measurements. In 2002 (only), the goats were slaughtered and carcass traits were measured.
The rations and supplements were formulated to produce weight gains and fleece weights that should have ranked FL >RF≥P. In
fact, the FL and RF goats gained faster and grew more than the P goats. Overall gain rates were 124, 61, and 135 g/day for FL, P,
and RF, respectively, while corresponding shorn body weights were 37, 30, and 38 kg. The larger animals in the FL and RF systems
produced more mohair than goats in the P system (3.3 kg versus 2.8 kg, greasy). Mohair from RF goats was coarser than that from
P goats (31.5  m versus 29.6  m) and contained lower curvature (18.8◦/mm versus 20.6◦/mm). System did not affect any of the
other measured traits including scoured yield, mohair production efficiency (mohair production/kg BW), medullation, staple length,
or any of the measures of trait variability (CV). System had no effect on dressing percentage but the consistent trend for carcass
weight, back fat thickness, and body wall thickness, was consistent with live weights, FL =RF > P. As planned, coated produced
higher yielding (74% versus 71%) fleeces compared to those from uncoated animals. Coats did not affect any other measured trait.
Fiber and meat production were most expensive in the RF system and least expensive in the P system. Even with coats, mohair
produced in the FL and P systems was not clean enough to qualify for the hand spinner niche market. The RF coated fleeces exhibited
exceptional visual cleanliness that permitted them to be sold for several multiples of the prevailing mohair commodity price.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
