The objective of the present studywas to evaluate the effect of certain factors on sperm loss
during ram semen collection, using an artificial vagina (AV). The factors analyzed were the
effect of the male (8 rams), length of the artificial vagina (short versus long), order of the
ejaculate (first versus second ejaculate) and lubrication technique (with or without lube).
An observational study from a data set containing 55 semen collections from the 8 rams
of different breeds (Montadale, Suffolk, Hamphshire, Polypay) were evaluated during the
breeding season using a multiple regression statistical analysis over a period of 10 weeks.
The results did not show any differences between rams, order of the ejaculate or the use of
lubrication on sperm loss. The two types of artificial vaginas however showed significant differences
in the percentage sperm loss (P < 0.001). The total ejaculate volume (collection tube
volume + liner and cone recovery volume) and sperm concentration/ml (×109)were similar
when using the two types of artificial vaginas. The total ejaculate volume recorded for the
short artificial vagina was 1.5±0.4 ml and for the long artificial vagina was 1.3±0.6 ml. The
concentration of the ejaculate was 2.7±0.6×109 sperm/ml for the short artificial vagina
and 2.9±0.7×109 sperm/ml for the long artificial vagina. The volume of semen in the collection
tube using the short artificial vagina was 1.3±0.4 ml, compared to the 0.7±0.5 ml
for the long artificial vagina (P < 0.001). The percentage of sperm loss from the short artificial
vagina (12.9±5.9%) was significantly lower than when using the long artificial vagina
(50.8±13.9%; P < 0.001). From this study, it may be concluded that the type of artificial
vagina affects the sperm loss; with the shorter AV recording a lower sperm loss. No effects
were detected between rams, order of the ejaculate or the use of lubrication on sperm loss.
From the results obtained the use of the short artificial vagina can be recommended
