This paper reviews some of the key aspects of an animal health and production service in
New Zealand and Australia after 35 years of personal experience. The objective of that veterinary
advisory work is to increase production and profitability of sheep farms. Properties
serviced grazed between 3000 and 28,000 breeding ewes. A certain amount of knowledge
and understanding of sheep farming systems is necessary before a veterinarian can offer
such programmes. Much of that knowledge can be learned. Programmes can grow from
small beginnings, such as good animal health advice, and then expand into other areas of
sheep management. The provider should be comfortable giving advice on agronomy, nutrition,
genetics and economics. This information can be sourced or be provided by another
professional. The veterinarian is a source of practical information. When change is contemplated,
the options are presented and the most viable options should be considered. It is
essential to listen to the client, so that the advice recommended is most likely to be adopted.
After each visit a report should be written for the client, so that all recommendations are
clearly explained and can be referred to when necessary. The type of clientele serviced
varies, but all farmers want to increase production and efficiency in their operation. Some
want major structural change, while others may only want to be reassured that the contemplated
change will improve their performance. There is an increasing opportunity to work
for absentee owners and corporations that have profitability as their goal. Most clients could
be serviced intensively for 3–5 years and then are visited for an annual review. The areas
in which the greatest gains are made are in increasing lambing percentage and in growing
better young sheep. Minimizing wastage can be significant on some properties. The results
achieved vary with the ability of the sheep producer to introduce changes. However, on
many properties an initial small change is all that is required to increase income to allow
further development to occur. Most of the gains made in production do not incur increased
costs. On larger properties, income can be increased by up to AUD 250,000 annually. The
rewards from being involved in this work are huge. Sometimes one has to wait to see the
change, but that waiting is worthwhile. It is not only the production and income increase,
but the change in confidence of the producer that is most rewarding. The change in family
well-being is another reward, which is difficult to measure.
