The aim of this study was to evaluate a RAPD-PCR for the detection of B. melitensis Rev-1
vaccine strain. In addition, our objective was to isolate, identify and genetically characterize
B. melitensis strains from aborted sheep fetuses by PCR, RAPD-PCR and PCR-RFLP methods.
A total of 86 aborted sheep fetuses obtained from different herds (n = 86) in lambing season
of 2007–2008 were evaluated. Twelve B. melitensis strains, which isolated from aborted
sheep fetuses (n = 12) from same region between 2006 and 2007 years were also added in
this study for biotyping.
Brucella strains were isolated from 24 (28%) out of 86 aborted sheep fetus samples. All
Brucella strains were identified as B. melitensis by biochemical tests and PCR. Of the 36 B.
melitensis isolates, 3, 32 and 1 were identified as biotype 1, biotype 3 and B. melitensis Rev-1
vaccine strain, respectively. Field isolated B. melitensis Rev-1 vaccine strain was confirmed
by PCR-RFLP. Nine of 36 B. melitensis isolates were detected for being atypical since they
were susceptible to penicillin or thionin and basic fuchsin. DNA fingerprints of field isolates
and B. melitensis Rev-1 vaccine strain were obtained by RAPD-PCR method and dendograms
were created by UPGMA and NJ. Strains were separated similarly 14 subgroups in both
dendograms. 36 B. melitensis isolates from Konya region were detected that they had not
from the same source. Atypical strains that located in different subgroups have different
clonal origins. Levels of genetic similarity between reference strains and field isolates were
50.0–99.9%. That was 88.9% between reference vaccine strain B. melitensis Rev-1 and field
isolated B. melitensis Rev-1. It was also detected that B. melitensis Rev-1 vaccine strain cannot
be identified by the method RAPD-PCR alone, while isolates in located the same main group
with B. melitensis Rev-1 can be suspected for being the vaccine strain.
In conclusion, B. melitensis strains isolated in Konya region were found to be from different
sources by RAPD-PCR. B. melitensis biotype 3 was the most common biotype. B.
melitensis Rev-1 vaccine strain was isolated from aborted fetus in Turkey for the first time.
PCR-RFLP appear valuable tool for epidemiological studies on B. melitensis Rev-1 vaccine
strain. RAPD-PCR method was concluded as for being an easy to use and interpretate. This
is recommended for future studies on epidemiology of Brucellosis.
