The Merino-derived breeds represent a significant animal resource in terms of genetic
diversity and socio-economic relevance. The aim of this investigation was to define the
population structure and the genetic diversity of the Sopravissana, Merinizzata Italiana
and Gentile di Puglia breeds by employing 30 microsatellite molecular markers, also taking
Spanish Merino and Appenninica breeds into account, which are thought to represent
the male and the female ancestors, respectively, of the Italian Merino-derived breeds. A
further objective of this study was to remark on an issue generally linked to the development
of genetic groups that are spread worldwide: the degree to which geographic effects
and genetic origins are significantly influential in the evolution of a cosmopolitan genetic
group, such Merino sheep. Blood samples from 174 individuals were collected and genotyped.
A total of 366 alleles were detected. The mean number of alleles per breed ranged
from 7.22 for Gentile di Puglia to 8.21 for Merinizzata Italiana. The mean values of observed
heterozygosity (0.71) and expected heterozygosity (0.75) were high, suggesting that the
total analysed population is characterised by noticeable genetic variability. The Fis calculated
in each breed showed that a slight degree of heterozygosity deficiency exists within
each breed. The Fst value calculated (0.048) (P < 0.05) indicated the existence of poor segmentation
among the subpopulations. According to the Fst genetic distance estimates, the
most closely related breeds were Merinizzata Italiana and Gentile di Puglia (0.013). The
genetic tree built using the Reynolds weighted genetic distance among populations shows
the Merino-derived breeds occurring within a well-defined area, together with the Spanish
Merino breed, confirming their hypothetical origin. STRUCTURE analysis showed that
Sopravissana and, especially, Gentile di Puglia were breeds that were split into several
genetic patterns, suggesting a significant occurrence of admixture within these breeds. The
results arising from our microsatellites analysis could represent a starting point for planning
aimed at the safeguarding and valorisation of the three Italian Merino-derived sheep
breeds.
