Objective As the use of “day hospitals” increases,
conceptual models of these services are changing
dramatically across Europe. Therefore, the need
arises for mental health services research to assess this
process cross-nationally in a standardised and systematic
way. Such research approaches should seek to maximise
the generalisability of results from high-quality
(e. g. randomised controlled) single- or multi-site trials
assessing specific models of day hospital care. Method
Using a self-developed structured questionnaire, the European
Day Hospital Evaluation (EDEN) study group
carried out national surveys of the characteristics of day
hospitals for general psychiatric patients in Germany,
England, Poland, the Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic,
during the period 2001–2002. Results Response
rates varied from 52 to 91%.Findings show that day hospitals
have no consistent profile of structural and procedural
features. Similarities across countries focus on
three main issues: on average, consideration of concepts
oriented toward providing acute treatment are equivalent;
disorders associated with disabled functioning in
everyday life, high risk of somatic complications, and
need for behaviour control are excluded to a comparable
degree; and some core therapeutic activities are consistent
with the main approaches of social psychiatry.
Identified according to self-rated conceptions and extended
with data from individual hospital’s statistics on
the clientele in 2000, three clusters of limited selectivity
subdivide the services. One category focuses mainly on
rehabilitative tasks; two categories are oriented toward
providing acute treatment as an alternative to inpatient
care, but combine this either with rehabilitative tasks or
with equal additional functions of shortening inpatient
treatment and providing psychotherapy. The distribution
of services across these three clusters varies significantly
in the five European countries.Conclusion Future
day hospital studies should always clarify the type of
services being assessed. To fully consider the impact of
their results, the current national and international
health policy environment of these services should be
taken into account. Such surveys require enhanced
methodology,however, in order to identify clear, distinct
categories of services characterised by overlapping programme
functions, and to increase the generalisability
of valid results from single- or multi-site trials.
