Background Research on lay public’s attitudes
toward the treatment of mental disorders is receiving
increasing scientific attention. Most of the surveys
on lay public attitudes have used rating approaches.
However, in daily life, people are forced to make decisions.
Therefore, we used a ranking approach to elucidate
preferences of the lay public, aiming to reflect the
real life decision-making process. Objective We investigated
preferences of the lay public regarding sources of
help and treatment options in case of mental disorder.
Methods In the spring of 2001, a representative survey
was carried out in Germany (n=5015). A personal fully
structured interview was conducted which started with
the presentation of a vignette depicting someone with
either schizophrenia or major depression. Respondents
were asked to make first and second choices regarding
the recommendation of source of help and treatment.
Furthermore, socio-demographic characteristics and
illness behaviour as possible determinants were assessed
and analysed using logistic regression. Results
Even though most of the people advise professional
help, especially from mental health professionals, a large
gap remains between evidence-based treatment strategies
and public opinion. Psychotherapy is by far the
most favoured treatment. In contrast, psychotropic drug
treatment was only suggested by the minority for firstchoice
treatment. Certain beliefs concerning illness and
socio-demographic characteristics are associated with
specific recommendations regarding source of help and
treatment. Conclusion The consequences are twofold.
First, as mental health professionals are dealing with
non-compliance especially to psychotropic drugs, they
have to realise that basic beliefs and expectations may
play a more prominent role than has been previously assumed.
Consequently, they have to put far more effort
into what is called psychoeducation. Secondly, public
knowledge about mental disorders and their treatment
strategies has to be enhanced by working with the mass
media and looking for other tailored interventions.
