Objective The objectives of the study are
(1) to assess the mental health literacy of mental health
professionals, (2) to determine whether there is agreement
between different professional groups with respect
to different psychopathological conditions and
(3) to compare the professionals’ knowledge with
that of the general population. Methods Two representative
samples of mental health professionals and
laypersons were presented with a vignette depicting
either a person with schizophrenia, major depression
or without any psychiatric symptoms (‘non-case’).
Out of 18 treatment proposals, the respondents were
asked to indicate the proposals regarded as helpful
and those considered as being harmful, respectively,
for the person depicted. Results Mental health professionals
view their profession and less often their
treatment methods as helpful. Dealing with the situation
alone, electroconvulsive therapy, hypnotics and
sedatives are consistently regarded as harmful. For
the individual with schizophrenia, mental health professionals
agree about helpful treatments. Regarding
depression, a lack of consensus is found about treatment
proposals such as psychiatric hospitalisation,
antidepressants and complementary and alternative
medicine. An important part of mental health professionals
suggests medical help (psychologists and general
practitioners) for the non-case vignette. Fewer
nurses, social workers, vocational workers and occupational
therapists (‘other therapists’) as compared to
psychiatrists and psychologists recommend standard
treatment methods. Professionals and the general population
significantly differ in their attitudes towards the
treatment suggestions, especially regarding medication
and alternative medicine. Conclusions To improve the
treatment of mental disorders, various strategies must
be considered. These include permanent education of
all mental health professionals, especially nurses and
other therapists. A special focus must be given to affective
disorders and a potential (over-) treatment of
normal behaviour.
