Background Although attitudes towards
psychiatric illness influence its presentation, detection,
recognition, treatment adherence and rehabilitation,
the lay public's opinions and beliefs about the
treatment of depression have not been investigated
sufficiently. Objective The aim of this study was to
determine public opinions and beliefs about the treatment
of depression and the influence of perception
and causal attributions on attitudes towards treatment
of depression in urban areas. Methods This study was
carried out with a representative sample in Istanbul,
which is the biggest metropolis in Turkey. Seven hundred
and seven subjects completed the public survey
form which consisted of 32 items rating attitudes towards
depression. Results The public believes that
psychological and social interventions are more effective
than pharmacotherapy, and that the medicines
used in treatment of depression are harmful and addictive.
There was a general reluctance to consult a
physician for depression, and psychiatrists were felt
to be more helpful than general practitioners. The
public viewed depression as treatable. A high educational
level and perceiving depression as a disease is
associated with positive beliefs and opinions about
the treatment of depression; but the perception of depressive
patients as aggressive is associated with
negative beliefs and opinions about the treatment of
depression. Conclusion The beliefs that “psychological
and social interventions are more effective than
pharmacotherapy” and “antidepressants are harmful
and addictive” must specifically be taken into account
in clinical practice and in anti-stigma campaigns. Additional
studies are needed to understand the public's
tendency to conceptualise depression as a psychosocial
problem. In clinical practice, depression should be in
troduced as a bio-psychosocial disease whatever its
cause: biological, psychological or social. In addition,
the differences between extreme worry and disease,
and the lack of aggressiveness of depressive patients,
must be emphasised.
