Background Suicide and other suicidal
behaviours are markedly (though differently) patterned
by gender. The increase in young male suicide
rates in many countries has heightened interest in
whether suicidal behaviours and ideation (thoughts)
are related to masculinity. Relatively little research
has explored the relationship between gender role
attitudes and orientation and suicidal behaviours and
ideation. Most research in this area has been conducted
with young people. Objective We investigated
whether gender role orientation (masculinity and
femininity scores) and gender role attitudes were related
to the reporting of serious suicidal thoughts in
three generations (early adulthood, and early and late
middle age) in a community sample. Methods Subjects
(653 men and women aged around 23 years, 754
aged around 43 years, 722 aged around 63 years)
completed home interviews with nurses as part of an
ongoing longitudinal community-based study of social
factors and health. These included measures of
suicidal ideation (thoughts), attitudes to traditional
gender roles, and a validated measure of gender role
orientation (masculinity and femininity scores). Results
The prevalence of serious suicidal thoughts was
higher in early adulthood (10% men, 15% women)
than in early (4% men, 8% women) and late (6% men,
5% women) middle age. In early adulthood only sex
was significantly related to suicidal thoughts, with
women at higher risk (adjusted OR 1.74, 95% CI 1.01–
3.00). In early middle age masculinity scores were
negatively related to suicidal thoughts (adjusted OR
for each unit increase in score 0.65: 95% CI 0.46–
0.93), and more traditional views on gender roles were
positively associated with suicidal thoughts (adjusted
OR 1.48: 95% CI 1.07–2.04). In late middle age trends
were in the same direction as in early middle age, but
were not statistically significant. Femininity scores
were unrelated to serious suicidal thoughts at any age.
Conclusion The high rates of suicidal thoughts
amongst men and women in early adulthood point to
the importance of understanding mental health
problems at this age. The results raise a number of
questions and suggest that suicide researchers should
pay more attention to gender roles and attitudes in
older adults.
