Objective Ambulatory care for subjects
with severe mental problems has been clearly shown
to be a valid alternative to hospitalisation. However,
very few studies have considered the fate of patients
over several years. Ambulatory care services are often
experimental set-ups, for small groups, and their
impact on subsequent treatment has only been assessed
over the first few months of treatment. The
value of developing this practice therefore remains
unclear. We investigated the possible consequences of
generalising ambulatory care services by a mobile
crisis intervention team (E´RIC) to all requests for the
first hospitalisation in a psychiatric department. The
principal aim was to determine whether systemic
intervention by the crisis intervention team could
provide a true alternative to hospitalisation. We also
investigated whether problem-resolving approaches
and ambulatory care led, in the long term, to fewer
prolonged or repeated periods of hospitalisation than
practices in which hospitalisation was considered as
an ordinary solution. Methods We carried out a
prospective, comparative, cohort study over a 5-year
period beginning with the creation of E´ RIC by one of
the hospital departments. All patients arriving at this
department for the first time were offered immediate
ambulatory care by this team for 1 month. Their
hospitalisation record (duration of hospital stay,
number of days in hospital) was compared with that
of subjects hospitalised in the same conditions but in
other departments of the hospital. Results This study
included most of the subjects referred for the first
time to the psychiatric hospital, in our department.
Regardless of their diagnosis, intensive follow-up at
home, based on systemic crisis intervention work, was
found to be an effective and well-accepted alternative
to hospitalisation. Indeed, a highly significant immediate
decrease in both the number of admissions and
the duration of hospital stay was observed for the
experimental group, with no subsequent increase in
the number of days of hospitalisation. From the second
year onwards, the use of hospitalisation did not
seem to be influenced by the type of care initially
given to the patient. Rehospitalisation was rare in
both groups. One third of the patients in the experimental
group benefited from another intervention of
the ambulatory emergency team from the second year
onwards, highlighting the value placed on this type of
care by the patients and their families. Conclusion
Our results support the development of ambulatory
crisis intervention services, including those
from psychiatric hospitals. Clinical studies following
the treatment paths of patients in a more exhaustive
manner would almost certainly distinguish more
precisely between the ‘‘natural’’ course of the disease
and the impact of the care provided. In any case, the
prevention of hospitalisation must be based as much
on a possible alternative at the time of the crisis as on
subsequent access to ambulatory care.
