Background Recent population-based
stud- ies in Latin American and the Caribbean (LAC)
countries brought evidence of the growing burden of
mental illness in this region. The objective of this
study is to examine determinants of health service
utilization by individuals with psychiatric disorders in
a defined area in the city of Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil. Method
Data were derived from Sa˜o Paulo Catchment
Area Study (SP-ECA), a cross-sectional household
prevalence survey, based on a representative adult
sample (N = 1,464) living in two defined boroughs.
The psychiatric diagnosis was assessed through the
CIDI 1.1 interview, yielding ICD-10 diagnoses. The
past-month use of health services—for general medical
(GM) care and mental health (MH) care sectors—
was investigated in their relationship with
sociodemographic features, insurance coverage, GM
conditions, and psychiatric morbidity. Results Nearly
one-third (32.2%) of the total sample used health
services in the last month: 29.0% attended GM care
and 7.8% used MH care. Logistic regression models
showed that being female, older than 60 years, having
private insurance coverage, and presence of psychiatric
morbidity increased the level GM care seeking in
the total sample. For those with 12-month psychiatric
disorders, the determinants for GM sector use were
female gender, age 45–59 years old, and private
insurance coverage, whereas separated, divorced, or
widowed women had the highest odds (OR 9.9; 95%
CI: 2.7–36.5) for using MH service. Low-income
people were less likely to seek MH services. Conclusion
The major contribution of this article is to
underscore the impact of MH on health care systems,
in a LAC country where service use information is
scarce. The main finding is that inequalities in the
access to MH care occurred, with low-income people
having less likelihood of receiving treatment for their
mental disorder. Access to health service in this
catchment area reflected the great degree of deregulation
and lack of integration. Additional efforts
should address the barriers to the utilization of MH
services in Brazil, including social inequities in the
access to care.
