Objective To identify the possible risk
factors and negative outcomes associated with
parental alcoholism. A secondary aim was to determine
the influence of the family density of alcoholism
on children of alcoholics’ (COAs) psychological
functioning. Method A multisite epidemiological
study was conducted in 8 Spanish cities, recruiting a
total sample of 371 COAs (whose parents were in
contact with alcohol treatment centers and accepted
to participate in this study) and 147 controls (from
schools in the same localities as COAs). Both groups
were 6–17 years old and received a comprehensive
evaluation of mental disorders (no symptoms, subclinical
symptoms or clinical diagnosis for each disorder;
according to DSM-IV criteria); alcohol and
other substance use (none, occasional, regular and
risky consumption); school achievement (low, middle
and high) and other academic performance indicators
(WISC-R Information and Arithmetic subtests,
school support activities and failed subjects and
courses). Lastly, several cognitive functions were
measured by the WISC-R Similarities, Block Design
and Digit Symbol subtests, the Toulouse-Pie´ron test
and the Stroop test. Logistic regression methods were
used to compare both groups and a linear regression
model was used to determine the influence of the
family density of alcoholism. The following confounding
variables were controlled for: age, gender,
socio-economic status and family cohesion.
Results Children of alcoholics’ were twice as likely as
controls to present subclinical symptoms and four
times more likely than controls to have a definite
diagnosis of any mental disorder. More specifically,
COAs had a significantly higher risk than controls of
attention deficit disorder/hyperactivity, depressionphobias, enuresis and tics. COAs also tended to have
more symptoms of generalized anxiety disorder.
COAs had worse results on all the cognitive tests
used and their risk of low school achievement was
nine times higher than that of controls. Family density
of alcoholism was significantly related to several
psychiatric disorders and to low academic and cognitive
performance in these children. Conclusion
Children of alcoholics’ whose parents are in
contact with treatment centers in Spain constitute a
target group for selective prevention, as they have a
higher risk of different negative outcomes, which
mainly include attention disorders and other cognitive
deficits, depression and anxiety.
