Objective The aim of this study was to
describe the characteristics of recent interpersonal
violence perpetrated and experienced by individuals
recruited from acute crisis mental health and substance
abuse treatment settings and to examine differences
among incidents involving individuals with mental
disorders only (MDO), substance use disorders only
(SDO), and co-occurring mental and substance use
disorders (COD). Method Participants (N = 419) were
interviewed about their involvement in specific acts of
violence in the past 30 days. Participants were also
asked about where each incident took place, who was
involved, whether individuals were injured, and whether
alcohol or drugs were used before the incident. We
examined distributions of violence characteristics for
the full sample and used logistic regression analyses to
test differences among incidents involving participants
with MDO, SDO, and COD. Results Approximately
41% (n = 171) of the sample was involved in at least
one incident of violence as a perpetrator or a victim,
generating a total of 379 incidents. Far more incidents
of violence involved victimization (62%) than perpetration
(38%). Most incidents were isolated and
involved only perpetration or only victimization.
However, a total of 98 (26%) incidents occurred
with another incident and constituted 49 episodes
of violence that included incidents of perpetration
and victimization. Characteristics of perpetration
and victimization incidents were similar, except that
victimization incidents involved more serious types of
violence. The majority of incidents took place outdoors
and did not result in injuries. Participants used drugs or
alcohol prior to over 40% of incidents. Most incidents
of perpetration (70%) targeted someone known to the
participant. Diagnostic group was the strongest predictor
of type of injury, location of incident, and use of
alcohol and drugs before the incident. Individuals with
substance use disorders, either alone or co-occurring
with mental disorders, were more likely to report that
violent incidents took place outdoors. Individuals with
mental disorders, either alone or co-occurring with
substance use disorders, were less likely to report
alcohol and drug use prior to involvement in violence.
Conclusions Violence is common among individuals
entering acute crisis mental health and substance abuse
treatment. We found that such persons are more likely
to report being victims of violence than perpetrators of
violence. In contrast to prior studies, we found that
most incidents took place outdoors. Although individuals
in different diagnostic groups were no more or
less likely to perpetrate or experience violence, they
perpetrated and experienced violence under different
circumstances. Implications and directions for future
research and practice are discussed.
