Background Refugees in western countries
often face long juridical procedures before their
requests for a resident permit is granted. The, still
scanty, literature shows high prevalence rates of psychopathology
among asylum seekers, but there has
been little interest for other impaired dimensions of
health. The present study is part of a community-based
mental health survey among Iraqi asylum seekers in the
Netherlands, conducted between November 2000 and
September 2001, on the risks of a long asylum procedure.
Objectives The objectives of this study were to
explore quality of life (QoL), disability and physical
health and their relationships with psychopathology
and pre- and post-migration variables. Method Two
groups of pre-stratified (length of asylum procedure),
randomly selected Iraqi asylum seekers (N = 143 and
N = 151), were interviewed with fully structured, culturally
validated questionnaires. Quality of life was
examined with QoLWHO-Bref, functional disability
with the Brief Disability Questionnaire and physical
health with a newly developed questionnaire. Psychiatric
(DSM IV) disorders were measured with theWHO
Composite International Diagnostic Interview 2.1.
Multivariate logistic regression analyses were used to
estimate the relationships between the outcome measures
and socio-demographics, adverse life events in
Iraq, post-migration living problems (PMLP) and
psychopathology. Results Respondents with a long
asylum procedure reported significantly lower QoL,
higher functional disability and more physical complaints.
Multivariate regression shows that length of
stay is the strongest predictor for a low overall QoL. In
addition, lower QoL was predicted by psychopathology,
higher age, adverse life events in the Netherlands
and the PMLP-clusters: family issues, socio-economic
living conditions and socio-religious aspects. Disability
was predicted by psychopathology, higher age and the
PMLP clusters: family issues and socio-religious aspects.
Physical complaints were predicted by length of
asylum procedure, psychopathology, female sex, adverse
life events in Iraq and PMLP-family issues. Conclusion
A long asylum procedure has a negative impact
on the overall health situation and the QoL of asylum
seekers. The situation is not only harming the affected,
but also interferes with the integration process in the
Netherlands or elsewhere. The findings are important
for health professionals, governments and human right
specialists.
