Objective This pilot study compares the
level of distress and the need for support between
carers of patients with anorexia (AN) and bulimia
nervosa (BN) and carers of patients with schizophrenia.
Methods Thirty-two carers of patients suffering
from AN and BN and 30 carers of patients with
schizophrenia filled out the general health questionnaire
(GHQ-12) and the burden inventory (BI). In
addition, they were interviewed with a semi-structured
research interview, the carers’ needs assessment
(CNA), to assess relevant problem areas as well as the
need for helpful interventions. Patients with an eating
disorder were interviewed with the eating disorder
examination (EDE) and patients with schizophrenia
with the positive and negative syndrome scale
(PANSS) to assess the severity of the disorder.
Results The mean duration of illness was 5.3 years in
the patients with eating disorders and 7.3 years in the
patients with schizophrenia. Most of the carers were
mothers or partners. In the CNA we found high
numbers of problems as well as high numbers of
unmet needs for interventions. The most frequently
mentioned problem areas in all groups of carers were
‘‘disappointment caused by the chronic course of the
illness, concerns about the patient’s future’’ and
‘‘problems in communication with the patient’’. The
most frequently reported need for support in all
groups was ‘‘counseling and support by a professional’’.
Carers of patients with BN reported a significantly
lower number of problems and of needs for
interventions compared to the carers of patients with
AN and schizophrenia. Also in the BI and the GHQ-12
we found significantly lower total scores in carers of
patients with BN. Carers of patients with AN and
schizophrenia did not differ significantly in any of the
assessments. The severity or duration of illness of the
patients did not correlate with the carers’ burden or
needs. Conclusions Carers of patients with an eating
disorder and carers of patients with schizophrenia are
burdened with similar problems and have high levels
of unmet needs which are usually not addressed in
clinical practice. Carers of anorectic patients have
higher levels of difficulties in various areas compared
to carers of bulimic patients and did not differ from
carers of patients with schizophrenia
