Objective Health care utilization studies
of mental disorders focus largely on the ICD-9 category
290–319, and do not generally include analysis
of visits for mental health problems identified under
V-code categories. Although active duty service
members represent a large young adult employed
population who use mental health services at similar
rates as age-matched civilian populations, V-codes
are used in a larger proportion of mental health
visits in military mental health care settings than in
civilian settings. However, the utilization of these
diagnoses has not been systematically studied. The
purpose of this study is to characterize outpatient
behavioral health visits in military health care facilities
prior to Operation Iraqi Freedom, including the
use of diagnoses outside of the ICD-9 290–319 range,
in order to evaluate the overall burden of mental
health care. This study establishes baseline rates of
mental health care utilization in military mental
health clinics in 2000 and serves as a comparison for
future studies of the mental health care burden of
the current war. Methods All active duty service
members who received care in military outpatient
clinics in 2000 (n = 1.35 million) were included.
Primary diagnoses were grouped according to mental
health relevance in the following categories:
mental disorders (ICD-9 290–319), mental health Vcode
diagnoses (used primarily by behavioral health
providers that were indicative of a potential mental
health problem), and all other diagnoses. Rates of
service utilization within behavioral health clinics
were compared with rates in other outpatient clinics
for each of the diagnostic groups, reported as individuals
or visits per 1,000 person-years. Cox proportional
hazard regression was used to produce
hazard ratios as measures of association between
each of the diagnostic groups and attrition from
military service. Time to attrition in months was the
difference between the date of military separation and
the date of first clinic visit in 2000. Data were obtained
from the Defense Medical Surveillance System.
Results The total number of individuals who utilized
behavioral health services in 2000 was just over 115
per 1,000 person-years, almost 12% of the military
population. Out of every 1,000 person-years, 57.5
individuals received care from behavioral health
providers involving an ICD-9 290–319 mental disorder
diagnosis, and an additional 26.7 per 1,000
person-years received care in behavioral health
clinics only for V-code diagnoses. Attrition from
service was correlated with both categories of mental
health-related diagnoses. After 1 year, approximately
38% of individuals who received a mental disorder
diagnosis left the military, compared with 23% of
those who received mental health V-code diagnoses
and 14% of those who received health care for any
other reason (which included well visits for routine
physicals). Conclusions This study establishes baseline
rates of pre-war behavioral healthcare utilization
among military service members, and the relationship
of mental health care use and attrition from
service. The research indicates that in the military
population the burden of mental illness in outpatient
clinics is significantly greater when V-code diagnoses
are included along with conventional mental disorder
diagnostic codes.
