Objective Mental health problems are
highly prevalent in young adults. Despite possibilities
for effective treatment, only about one-third of young
adults with mental health problems seek professional
help. Little knowledge exists of which groups of young
adults are underusing mental health services and for
what reasons. The present study examined sociodemographic
inequalities in the use of mental health
services by young adults, and examined whether such
inequalities were attributable to differences in objective
need, subjective need, predisposing or enabling
factors. Design Cross-sectional study among the
general population aged 19–32 years (2,258 respondents).
A postal survey was administered including
questions on socio-demographic factors and mental
health service use. Data were analyzed with logistic
regression analysis. Setting South–West Netherlands.
Participants All respondents with serious internalizing
and externalizing problems (n = 367). Main outcome
measure Twelve-month primary and specialty
mental health services use. Results Only 34.6% of
young adults with psychopathology had used any
mental health services: 16.2% had used only primary
mental health services and 18.4% had used specialty
mental health services. No socio-demographic differences
were found in the use of only primary mental
health services. However, recipients of specialty
mental health services were more often female
(OR = 2.12, 95% CI = 1.14–3.96), economically inactive
(OR = 3.12, 95% CI = 1.59–6.09) or students
(OR = 2.38, 95% CI = 1.05–5.42) and they were less
often higher educated (OR = 0.49, 95% CI = 0.25–
0.97). The higher odds ratio for specialty service use
among young adults who were female or economically
inactive attenuated when adjusting for need for care.
The other socio-demographic disparities in specialty
service use did not attenuate when adjusting for need,
enabling or predisposing factors. Conclusion Among
young adults, equal use of specialty mental health
services for equal needs has not been achieved. The
underserved groups of young adults oppose the traditionally
underserved groups in the general population,
and may inform interventions aimed at
improving young people’s help-seeking behaviours.
