Objective We sought to identify common risk factors
associated with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) onset
and course, including delayed, persistent, and remitted
PTSD following a major traumatic exposure.
Method Based on a prospective study of New York City
adults following the World Trade Center disaster (WTCD),
we conducted baseline interviews with 2,368 persons one
year after this event and then at follow-up 1 year later to
evaluate changes in current PTSD status based on DSM-IV
criteria.
Results Baseline analysis suggested that current PTSD,
defined as present if this occurred in the past 12 months,
was associated with females, younger adults, those with
lower self-esteem, lower social support, higher WTCD
exposure, more lifetime traumatic events, and those with a
history of pre-WTCD depression. At follow-up, current
PTSD was associated with Latinos, non-native born persons,
those with lower self-esteem, more negative life
events, more lifetime traumatic events, and those with
mixed handedness. Classifying respondents at follow-up
into resilient (no PTSD time 1 or 2), remitted (PTSD time
1, not 2), delayed (no PTSD time 1, but PTSD time 2), and
persistent (PTSD both time 1 and 2) PTSD, revealed the
following: compared to resilient cases, remitted ones were
more likely to be female, have more negative life events,
have greater lifetime traumatic events, and have pre-
WTCD depression. Delayed cases were more likely to be
Latino, be non-native born, have lower self-esteem, have
more negative life events, have greater lifetime traumas,
and have mixed handedness. Persistent cases had a similar
profile as delayed, but were the only cases associated with
greater WTCD exposures. They were also likely to have
had a pre-WTCD depression diagnosis. Examination of
WTCD-related PTSD at follow-up, more specifically,
revealed a similar risk profile, except that handedness was
no longer significant and WTCD exposure was now
significant for both remitted and persistent cases.
Conclusion PTSD onset and course is complex and
appears to be related to trauma exposure, individual predispositions,
and external factors not directly related to the
original traumatic event. This diagnostic classification may
benefit from additional conceptualization and research as
this relates to changes in PTSD status over time.
