Objective The aim of this study was to better understand
the knowledge of schizophrenia, preferences regarding
professional help, medication and treatment methods
among Australians of a Chinese-speaking background.
Methods A cluster convenience sampling method was
adopted in which subjects were taken from the four main
areas in cosmopolitan Melbourne where most Chinese
people live. A total of 200 Chinese-speaking Australians
participated in the study. They were presented with a
vignette describing an individual with schizophrenia and
were then asked questions to assess their understanding of
schizophrenia and their preferences regarding professional
help, medication and treatment methods. A comparative
approach was used to compare our findings with those of a
previous study on the mental health literacy of Australian
and Japanese adults.
Results Compared with the Australian and Japanese
samples, a much lower percentage of Chinese-speaking
Australians (15.5%) was able to identify the vignette as a
case of schizophrenia/psychosis. A higher percentage of
the Chinese-speaking Australians believed that professionals,
and particularly counselling professionals, could be
helpful for the person in the vignette. A higher percentage
of the Chinese-speaking Australian and Japanese samples
believed that close family members could be helpful, and
expressed more uncertainty about the usefulness or harmfulness
of certain medications than the Australian sample.
A higher percentage of the Chinese-speaking Australians
than the Australian and Japanese samples endorsed inpatient
treatment for the person in the vignette. About 22, 17,
19 and 28% of the Chinese-speaking Australian participants,
respectively, rated ‘traditional Chinese medical
doctors’, ‘Chinese herbal medications’, ‘taking Chinese
nutritional foods/supplements’ and ‘qiqong’ as helpful.
Many perceived ‘changing fungshui’ and ‘traditional Chinese
prayer’ to be harmful.
Conclusions Campaigns to increase the schizophrenia
literacy of Chinese-speaking Australians are needed and
must take into consideration the aforementioned socially
and culturally driven beliefs so that culturally relevant
education programmes can be developed
