Objectives We focused on the subjective quality of life
(QOL) indicators of the Lancashire quality of life profile,
European version (LQoLP-EU) in a Kuwaiti schizophrenia
sample. The objectives were: First, to assess the reliability
and validity of the questionnaire. Second, to highlight the
patients’ QOL profile, in comparison with the results of the
European five-nation study. Third, to examine the association
of perceived needs for care, caregiver burden, service
satisfaction, self-esteem and psychopathology, with three
indices of global QOL: total life satisfaction or perceived
QOL (PQOL) score; general wellbeing (GW) and Cantril’s
ladder (CL).
Method Consecutive outpatients in stable condition and
their family caregivers were interviewed with the LQoLP,
and measures of needs for care, service satisfaction, caregiver
burden and psychopathology.
Results There were 130 patients (66.1%m, mean age
36.8). Majority of the patients (56%) felt satisfied with
the nine domains of life investigated, and 44.6% felt
‘‘averagely’’ happy. Their clinical severity was moderate
(BPRS-18 = 44.4). In exploratory factor analysis (FA),
the original domains were mostly replicated. Reliability
indices were significant ([0.7). In stepwise regression
analyses, the associations of PQOL were more in number
and mostly different from those of GW and CL. The correlates
of PQOL included, social unmet need (8.1% of
variance), staff perception of unmet need (10.3%), general
satisfaction with services (11.3%), burden of caregiver
supervision (3.7%), self-esteem (2.9%) and positive
symptoms (2.6%). Of the nine life domains, health was the
most important correlate of GW and CL, indicating the
centrality of health status in judgments of subjective QOL.
In secondary FA, GW and CL loaded together, but separately
from life domains, implying that these are separable
parts of the subjective wellbeing construct.
Conclusion The profile of QOL scores was mostly similar
to European data. The significant multivariate association
with patients/staff perceptions of unmet need for care and
service satisfaction indicate the usefulness of staff professional
development and service improvement in outcome;
and imply that promotion of QOL should be an institutional
objective. Our finding about the relationship between the
three global measures of QOL has added support to the
emerging QOL theory
