Objective To examine the behavioral and emotional
problems and their correlates in left-behindchildren (LBC)
in the Hunan Province of China.
Methods A sample of 1,274 schoolchildren (48.7% girls;
12.4 ± 2.2 years old) completed the Strength and Difficulties
Questionnaire and their current caregivers completed
questionnaires about caregiver/bio-parent’s demographics
and teachers’ involvement with the family.
Results There were 629 (49%) children with a history of
being left behind, of which 486 were currently cared for by
a relative (RLC) and 41 by a non-relative (NRC). As much
as 102 had a past history of being left behind, but were
currently living with one or more biological parents at the
time of the survey (PLB). A total of 645 (51%) children
had no history of being left behind and were included as
controls. LBC had significantly more psychopathology and
less pro-social behaviors than the controls. These differences,
with the exception of more hyperactivity and less
pro-social behaviors, disappeared after adjusting for age,
education and socioeconomic status of the children,
parents/caregivers, and the involvement of the teachers.
The psychopathology of LBC was significantly inversely
correlated with these variables. Long duration and being
left behind at a younger age were significantly associated
with more psychopathology. Overall, NRC showed more
psychopathology, followed by PLB and then RLC. However,
with the exception of pro-social behaviors, after
adjusting for demographic variables and duration of being
left behind, all differences disappeared.
Conclusions LBC are at risk to develop emotional/
behavior problems, particularly if they are left behind early
in life, for longer periods, in the care of young caregivers or
nonrelatives with poor education and low socioeconomic
status, and with less teacher support. Strategies to prevent
the development of psychopathology and its amelioration,
and governmental policies to decrease the rates of LBC are
warranted
