Objective Depression is a clinical syndrome developed in
Western Europe and North-America. The expression of
symptoms and the impact of symptoms on functioning may
therefore be expected to vary across cultures and languages.
Our first aim was to study differences in depressive
symptom profile between indigenous and non-Western
immigrant populations in the Netherlands. We hypothesized
that differences in expression of depressive
symptoms would be more likely in the domains of mood
and cognitions, and less likely in the domains of psychomotor
and vegetative symptoms. Our second aim was to
study ethnic differences in the association of depressive
symptoms and general functioning.
Method In a random community sample stratified for
ethnicity in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, depressive
symptoms were assessed by bilingual interviewers using
the Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI
2.1) and the Symptom Checklist-90-Revised (SCL-90-R).
Impairments in functioning were measured by the World
Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule II
(WHODAS II). Results were obtained from 812 subjects:
N = 321 native Dutch, N = 213 Turkish-Dutch, N = 191
Moroccan-Dutch, N = 87 Surinamese-Dutch. Differences
in depressive symptom expression were tested by differential
item functioning.
Results The prevalence of DSM-IV depressive disorder
and the overall level of depressive symptoms were higher
in the Turkish and Moroccan immigrant groups compared
to native Dutch subjects. Ethnic differences in item functioning
of depressive symptoms were rare, and equally
unlikely in all four symptom domains. Depression was
equally associated with functional impairment across ethnic
groups.
Conclusion Although depressive symptoms were more
common among migrants than in the indigenous population,
both the depressive symptom profile and the associated
functional impairments were comparable. These
findings may help diminishing concerns about the validity
of using existing diagnostic procedures among ethnic
minority groups.
