Objective To test whether a caregiver’s burden is associated
with the patient’s psychiatric diagnosis and to find
other predictors of family burden; to provide Polish data on
the issue to international literature.
Method Of 377 eligible subjects, 141 were interviewed
on admission to the mental hospital using Brief Psychiatric
Rating Scale, Manchester Short Assessment of Quality
of Life, Groningen Social Disability Schedule and Client’s
Sociodemographic and Clinical History Inventory.
Their caregivers completed the Involvement Evaluation
Questionnaire (IEQ). Subjects were grouped according to
ICD-10 diagnoses: schizophrenia (n = 55), depression
(n = 61), and anxiety and personality disorders (n = 25).
Highly aggressive, suicidal and somatically unstable
patients were excluded along with patients below 18 and
over 65 years. Statistics included multiple regression
analysis, ANOVA, Kruskal–Wallis and chi-square tests.
Results Diagnostic groups differed with respect to sociodemographics,
psychopathology and quality of life, but
not with respect to mean level of social functioning.
Despite between-group differences, the caregiver’s burden
did not differ according to the diagnostic group. Of the four
dimensions of burden, ‘‘worrying’’ and ‘‘urging’’ scored the
highest. Majority of caregivers worried about their relative’s
general health (82%), future (74%) and financial
status (66%). Caregivers’ characteristics and not patients’
explained the largest proportion of the family burden variance
(almost 23% for IEQ Tension). Higher burden
seemed to be associated with the carer’s age, being a parent
and number of hours spent weekly on caring for the ill
relative. Lower burden was associated with the carers’
subjective feelings of being able to cope with problems and
to pursue their own activities. Longer history of patient’s
illness led to higher IEQ Tension. Polish caregivers were
affected by their role in the same way as their counterparts
abroad, but more of them were worried.
Conclusions The caregiver’s burden seems to be independent
of the patient’s diagnosis, but other factors contribute
to the perceived burden, many of which are on the
caregiver’s part. In Poland, the overall family burden may
be attributed mostly to worrying about a mentally ill relative
and his future. All caregivers may benefit from
psychoeducation and family interventions usually planned
for those caring for relatives with schizophrenia.
