Background Latinos in the United States have been
identified as a high-risk group for depression, anxiety, and
substance abuse. HIV/AIDS has disproportionately
impacted Latinos. Review findings suggest that HIV-risk
behaviors among persons with severe mental illness (SMI)
are influenced by a multitude of factors including psychiatric
illness, cognitive-behavioral factors, substance use,
childhood abuse, and social relationships.
Objective To examine the impact of psychiatric and
social correlates of HIV sexual risk behavior in Puerto
Rican women with SMI.
Methods Data collected longitudinally (from 2002 to
2005) in semi-structured interviews and from non-continuous
participant observation was analyzed using a crosssectional
design. Bivariate associations between predictor
variables and sexual risk behaviors were examined using
binary and ordinal logistic regression. Linear regression was
used to examine the association between significant predictor
variables and the total number of risk behaviors the
women engaged in during the 6 months prior to baseline.
Results Just over one-third (35.9%) of the study population
(N = 53) was diagnosed with bipolar disorder and
GAF scores ranged from 30 to 80 with a median score of
60. Participants ranged in age from 18 to 50 years
(M = 32.6 ± 8.7), three-fourths reported a history of
either sexual or physical abuse or of both in childhood, and
one-fourth had abused substances in their lifetimes.
Bivariate analyses indicated that psychiatric and social
factors were differentially associated with sexual risk
behaviors. Multivariate linear regression models showed
that suffering from increased severity of psychiatric
symptoms and factors and living below the poverty line are
predictive of engagement in a greater number of HIV
sexual risk behaviors.
Practical implications Puerto Rican women with SMI are
at high risk for HIV infection and are in need of targeted
sexual risk reduction interventions that simultaneously
address substance abuse prevention and treatment, childhood
abuse, and the indirect effects associated with SMI
such as living in poverty. Mental health programs should
address risk behavior among adults with SMI in the context
of specific symptomatology and comorbidities.
