Background People with mental disorders often report
unmet medicine information needs and may search for
information on medicines from sources including the
Internet, telephone services, books and other written
materials.
Objective This study aimed to identify and describe the
sources of medicines information used by people with and
without mental disorders.
Methods A cross sectional postal survey was mailed to a
nationally representative sample (n = 5,000) of Finns aged
15–64 years in spring 2005. Completed responses were
received from 3,287 people (response rate 66%), of whom
2,348 reported using one or more sources of medicines
information during the past 12 months. Of those who
reported one or more sources of medicines information,
10% (n = 228) reported being diagnosed with or treated
for a mental disorder. The main outcome measures were
the sources of medicines information used by people who
did and did not report being diagnosed with or treated for a
mental disorder.
Results Among respondents with and without a mental
disorder, physicians (83 vs. 59%), pharmacists (56 vs.
49%) and patient information leaflets (53 vs. 43%) were the
most common sources of medicines information. After
adjusting for age, gender, level of education, working
status and number of chronic diseases, respondents with
mental disorders were more likely to use patient information
leaflets (OR 1.47, 95% CI 1.06–1.98) and the Internet
(OR 1.64, 95% CI 1.02–2.64) as sources of medicines
information than respondents without mental disorders.
Conclusions The results indicate that physicians and
pharmacists are the most common sources of medicines
information among people both with and without mental
disorders. However, patient information leaflets and the
Internet were more commonly used by people with mental
disorders. There may be an opportunity for clinicians to
better exploit these sources of medicines information when
developing medicines information services for people with
mental disorders.
