Background The effect of celebrity suicides on copycat
suicide attempts is not well known. Our objective was to
determine the association between celebrity suicide and
copycat suicide attempts.
Methods We conducted a retrospective multicenter
observational time series analysis. Celebrity suicides were
selected by an operational definition via three nationwide
television news internet sites from January 2005 to
December 2008. The reference week was defined as the
week preceding date of suicide notification to the public.
Then two pre-event weeks and four post-event weeks were
analyzed for suicide attempts. We derived a prediction
model for suicide attempt visits for each ED for these seven
observational weeks using a General Additive Model with
data from the National Emergency Department Information
System (NEDIS) database. We calculated the mean excess
visit (EV = observed visit - expected visit) and mean
excess visit ratio (EVR = EV/expected visit). We tested
the mean EV and EVR between reference weeks versus the
observational weeks using independent t test and repeated
measures ANOVA.
Results Five celebrity suicides occurred during the study
period. Total number of ED visits was 5,453,441 in the 85
EDs over the 4-year period, and suicide attempt or selfinjury
occurred in 27,605. The mean excess visit for each
observational interval per ED was less than 0.1 during
pre-event periods but increased to 0.695 in the second
post-event week. EVs were significantly higher in the first
to the third post-event weeks (p = 0.02, p\0.01,
p = 0.03, respectively) compared to reference week. The
mean EVRs were significantly higher (=0.215) in the
second post-week intervals compared with the reference
week (p = 0.03). Mean EVs and mean EVRs showed
significant increase in the post event period compared
with the observational period (p = 0.001 in EV,
p = 0.021 in EVR).
Conclusion From a prediction model using a 4-year
nationwide ED database, ED visits for suicide attempts or
self injury increased following the announcements of
celebrity suicides.
