Background In the past few years, there has been
increasing interest in studying the association between
problems in the neighbourhood environment and health
indicators. The objective of this study is to examine the
relationship between the perception of environmental
problems by individuals and the prevalence of common
mental disorders (CMD) in Spain.
Methods A cross-sectional study using data from a large
scale national representative survey of households (the
2006 Spanish National Health Survey). Participants included
in the study were aged between 16 and 64 years
(n = 23,760). The dependent variable was common mental
disorders assessed with the General Health Questionnaire
(GHQ-12). The independent variable was the individual’s
perception of environmental problems. Raw and adjusted
Odds Ratios and their confidence intervals (95%) were
calculated by fitting logistic regression models adjusting
for age, marital status, work situation, social class, rural or
urban area, country of origin, restrictions in carrying out
activities of daily life due to a health problem and social
support.
Results The individuals who reported environmental
problems had a higher prevalence of CMD. There was a
clear increasing gradient in CMD prevalence with the
increase in the number of environmental problems mentioned.
Among the subjects who reported to have 1 or no
environmental problem the prevalence of CMD was 11.8%
(men) and 18.7% (women), and among those who mentioned
6 or more problems, the prevalence increased to 20.8%
(men) and 35.4% (women). After adjusting for all the covariables,
there is an association between environmental
problems and CMD (men OR 1.44, 95% CI 1.08–1.66;
women OR 1.46, 95% CI 1.27–1.67). The environmental
problems most strongly associated with the prevalence of
CMD are noise, bad smell, air pollution, and lack of green
areas.
Conclusions Our findings show that individuals who
perceive environmental problems in their neighbourhood
have a higher prevalence of CMD, even after adjusting for
all co-variables. In addition, there is a clear increasing
gradient in the prevalence of CMD with the increase in the
number of environmental problems. Efforts to reduce the
prevalence of CMD must be directed to improve individual
and contextual risks.
