Objective The study reported in this paper was aimed at
developing understanding of depression-related knowledge
and preferences surrounding professional help, medication,
and treatment methods among Chinese living in Shanghai,
China.
Methods A multi-stage cluster sampling method in which
participants were taken from 6 of the 20 districts in
Shanghai was adopted for this study. The 522 Shanghai
Chinese participants were presented with a vignette describing
an individual with depression before being asked questions
designed to assess both their understanding of depression
and their preferences surrounding professional help, medication,
and treatment methods. A comparative approach
was adopted to identify similarities and differences between
our findings and those of two previous studies on the mental
health literacy of Chinese living in Melbourne, Australia,
and Hong Kong, respectively.
Results A similarly low percentage of Chinese people in
each of Shanghai, Hong Kong, and Australia recognized
depression. Fewer Shanghai Chinese than Chinese living in
Hong Kong and Australia ascribed the ‘anxiety/stress’ label
to the depression vignette and endorsed professionals and
informal network members as helpful. Although a far lower
percentage of Shanghai Chinese endorsed the use of
counseling professionals, a much higher percentage of the
same group endorsed Chinese medical doctors and herbal
medication. A lower percentage of Shanghai Chinese
endorsed ‘lifestyle changes’ as a strategy for combating
depression than did Chinese subjects living in Australia
and Hong Kong. On the other hand, a higher percentage of
Shanghai residents endorsed psychiatric treatment and the
traditional Chinese practices of ‘eating nutritious food/
taking supplements’ and ‘qigong’ than among the other
two groups of Chinese.
Conclusions This study underlines the need for campaigns
aimed at improving the mental health literacy of
Chinese in Shanghai. Such campaigns must take into
consideration the socially and culturally driven beliefs to
facilitate the development of specific education programs.
