Objective: Translate the available knowledge on ageing and dehydration into main messages for
clinical practice. Main points: Older people are more susceptible to dehydration than younger people. This is
partly due to lack of thirst sensation and changes in the water and sodium balance that naturally occur as people
age. It is also, to some degree, attributable to the fact that elderly people, both those living at home and those
living in institutions, often have various impairments, disabilities and/or handicaps (comorbidity). They also tend
to use numerous drugs and medication for these illnesses (polypharmacy). Multimorbidity and polypharmacy
often overstress the normal age-related physiological changes in the water and sodium balance and therefore
increase elderly people’s risk of dehydration,especially during intercurrent infections or warm weather. Elderly
people, whether they are living on their own or in an institution, and especially elderly people that can no longer
take care of themselves because of cognitive, sensory, motor and/or ADL impairments, need extra help to stay
hydrated. The most important strategy is simply a matter of ensuring that elderly people consume a sufficient
amount of fluids (at least 1.7 liters every 24 hours). Additional strategies include making healthy drinks and
water easily available and accessible at all times and reminding and encouraging the elderly to consume these
fluids. Elderly people should not be encouraged to consume large amounts of fluids at once but rather small
amounts throughout the day. When the recommended fluid intake cannot, for whatever reason, be realized, fluids
can be administered via catheter or by hypodermoclysis. In more specific and severe cases, fluids can be
administered intravenously. Conclusion: The prevention, signaling and treatment of dehydration in the elderly is
an important multidisciplinary endeavor. Formal and informal care providers need to continuously be aware of
the risk factors and signs of dehydration in the elderly, especially during periods of very warm weather and when
older people are ill. Standard professional care for high risk patients is imperative.
