Objective: Prior to the development of a healthy ageing and risk reduction of chronic diseases
intervention package for older people in Malaysia, a need assessment study was conducted to identify nutritional
knowledge status and information needs, as part of an action research process. Design: A cross sectional study
was conducted among 267 elderly people, 54 care givers and 66 health professionals in two rural areas of
Peninsular of Malaysia (i.e Sabak Bernam, Selangor and Kuala Pilah, Negeri Sembilan). Information on
nutritional knowledge was obtained from an interview based questionnaire for older subjects and caregiver and
through self administered questionnaire from the health professionals. Anthropometric and functional
measurements were also conducted among elderly subjects. Results: It was found that the elderly subjects had
poor nutritional knowledge with 43.8% of them classified as having unsatisfactory nutritional knowledge,
followed by moderately satisfactory (33.7%), very unsatisfactory (15.7%) and good (6.7%). Talks, counselling
sessions with health professionals and electronic media such as television and radio were the most preferred
nutrition education sources among elderly subjects and their care givers. The majority of health professionals
studied (98.5%) had good nutritional knowledge. Although most of them (93.6%) were involved in management
of the elderly, only 45.5% incorporated nutritional information component in this activity. Most of the health
professionals used the guidelines for management of elderly patients (63.6%). However, nutritional knowledge
was very minimal in these guidelines. Multiple regression analysis indicated that ‘level education’, involvement
in ‘social activities’, presence of ‘hearing problems’, the Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL) score,
having previous ‘nutritional information’ and ‘participation in healthy eating programme’ were the major
predictors of nutritional knowledge score among elderly subjects. Conclusion: Based on the above findings it is
thus, imperative that an appropriate nutritional intervention package and programme be developed so as to help
improve nutritional knowledge and subsequently the nutritional status of the rural elderly Malays.
