Objective: To evaluate possible risk factors for cataract in elderly Taiwanese, and to investigate
whether the relationship between age and cataract in older persons is modified by other cataract-associated risk
factors. Participants: A cross-sectional study of 661 males and 645 females aged ≥ 65 yrs was conducted as part
of the Elderly Nutrition and Health Survey in Taiwan (1999-2000) (Elderly NAHSIT). Methods: Self-reported
cataracts were defined as any incidence of cataract that was diagnosed by a physician and treated by
anticataractic drugs based on the medical history section of the Elderly NAHSIT. Potential risk factors for
cataract were determined by multiple logistic regression analysis of data obtained from the health examination,
blood biochemistry and interviewer-administered questionnaires. Results: Results showed that the prevalence of
self-reported cataract increased with age and was significantly higher in older women than in older men.
Cataracts were associated with age, diabetes, antihypertensive medication and folate insufficiency in older men,
and with age and antihypertensive medication in older women. Folate insufficiency remained associated with
cataract in older men who had adequate vitamin B2, B6 and B12 status. Folate insufficiency was associated with
cataract after adjustment for other risk factors in older men aged ≥ 75 yrs, while in older men aged 65-74 yrs,
only diabetes and antihypertensive medication remained associated with cataract. In addition, age ≥ 75 yrs
remained a risk factor for cataract in those without diabetes, not taking hypertensive medication and with normal
folate status. Further analysis showed that the strength of the association between age ≥ 75 yrs in older men and
cataracts was increased about 1.5-fold when combined with folate insufficiency (interaction p= 0.0198), and
increased about 1.8-fold when combined with use of antihypertensive medication (interaction p = 0.0214).
Conclusion: Our results suggest that the combination of age ≥ 75 yrs in older men with either folate insufficiency
or use of antihypertensive medication had an additive effect on the risk of cataract. Maintenance of good folate
status should be emphasized to reduce the risk of cataract in the Taiwanese elderly, especially men.
