Postural instability (PI) is an important risk factor for falls, especially in the frail older
population. In this study, we investigated the impact of vitamin D deficiency on PI in a sample of community
dwelling older subjects. Our objective was to determine the potential association between vitamin D deficiency
and PI in older fallers. Design: Cross-sectional study. Setting: Falls and Fractures Clinic, Department of Geriatric
Medicine, Nepean Hospital, Penrith, Australia. Participants: One hundred and forty-five adults aged 65 years
and older who have had at least one episode of a fall within the six months prior to assessment at the Falls and
Fractures Clinic. Measurements: Serum 25(OH) vitamin D3 [25(OH)D3] and parathyroid hormone
concentrations were determined at baseline. Subjects were separated into 3 groups based on serum 25(OH)D3
levels with the following cut-off values: < 30 nmol/L (deficient), 30-50 nmol/L (insufficient) and > 50 nmol/L
(normal). Other baseline measurements included body mass index, mini-nutritional assessment, grip strength,
serum calcium concentration and creatinine clearance, which were used as covariables. PI was assessed using a
computerized virtual reality system (Medicaa, Uruguay). Measured parameters included limits of stability (LOS)
and centre of pressure (COP) under eyes closed on foam (ECF) and visio-vestibular stimulation. The estimated
swaying area, computed from the ellipse of confidence under eyes closed standing on foam (ECF), was also used
as a PI parameter. Gait velocity (GV) was measured using a GaitRITE walkway system. Results: Posture was
impaired in vitamin D deficiency (<30 nmol/L) as indicated by lower LOS (90 +/- 18), higher ECF (25 +/- 10)
and slower GV (55 +/- 7) as compared with the insufficient and normal groups. After adjustment for
demographic, biochemical and anthropometric variables, vitamin D deficiency significantly correlated with low
LOS and high COP under ECF. Conclusion: Low levels of vitamin D were associated with PI. This association
could also have an effect on slow GV and increased risk of falls. In conclusion, using an objective method to
measure balance in older fallers we have identified a novel role of vitamin D in balance control. Prospective
studies are required to confirm the effect of vitamin D on PI and elucidate the mechanisms of this association
