our main objective was to assess whether a home-based program supervised by home
helpers (HH) during their normal working hours can prevent excessive sedentariness (mainly maximum walking
time and distance) and preserve functional status in elderly people at risk for frailty or disability and using
domestic services. Design: a four-month, open label, randomised trial with two groups called “prevention” and
“control”. Setting: in the homes of study participants. Participants: the participants were all over 78 years old,
lived independently at home, and received the visits of HHs at least once a week. Intervention: the intervention
combined a self-administered exercise program, with 10 g amino-acid supplementation under the supervision of
HHs. Measurements: Main outcome measures included physical activity (the Pase questionnaire), functional
tests, nutritional and autonomy scores, and compliance (50% or more was considered satisfactory). nonparametric
methods were used for comparisons between the two groups. a linear regression model was fitted to
assess the effect of the intervention on the relative variation of outcomes, adjusted for unbalanced baseline covariables.
Results: one hundred and two persons (prevention n=53, control n=49) with a median age of 85 years
were included. their median activities of Daily Living and instrumental activities of Daily Living (iaDL)
scores were 6 and 7 respectively. twenty-three (44%) were good compliers for both interventions. the maximum
walking time remained stable while decreasing by 25% in the control group (p=0.0015); and fewer participants
had a worsened iaDL score in the prevention group (p=0.05). the baseline iaDL score was significantly
associated with good compliance to the prevention program (p=0.0011). in good compliers, maximum walking
distance and maximum walking time increased by 29.15% (0.0 to 66.7) and 33.3% (-20.0 to 50.0) respectively.
Conclusion: this study confirms the feasibility of a prevention program supervised by HHs, and some benefit
from the intervention and identifies predictors for better compliance. it will help in the design of prevention trials
for elderly people at risk for frailty.
