Objective: The aim of this survey is to determine the main barriers of geriatric health care from the
physicians’ point of view and compare the improvement before and after the Continue Medical education (CMe)
provided by international association of gerontology and geriatrics (iagg). Design: Cross-sectional survey.
Setting and Participants: Five hundred samples were generated using systematic random sampling from the
address lists of physicians in Southwest China who had received the iagg CMe or been trained in Sichuan
association of geriatrics (Sag) CMe. Measurements: The interview instrument examined demographics and
information on geriatric education. Results: of the 500 physician sampled, 461(92.2 percent) responded. 34.3
percent of the respondents reported that over 70 percent of their patients were older persons. 76.8 percent of the
respondents felt that they lacked geriatric knowledge. only 15.6 percent of the respondents had geriatric
curriculum before graduation, and 26.0 percent received geriatric trainings after graduation. Most physicians felt
that “Language barrier” and “insufficient geriatric education in undergraduate medical school and postgraduate
education” were the main challenges in practicing geriatric medicine. geriatric training and knowledge are
inadequate due to the lack of geriatric curriculums in medical schools and CMe for physicians who practice
geriatrics. With the help of iagg, CMe in Southwest China provided more workshops on geriatric progress in
year 2011 than in year 2007-2010. eighty percent of the physicians acknowledged that the iagg CMe was
helpful for their clinical practice. The physicians paid more attention to geriatric syndromes rather than agerelated
pathophysiology alone. Conclusion: CMe provided by geriatric associations is helpful. Collaboration
between different geriatric societies such as iagg and Sag may be a good model for spreading geriatric
knowledge and should be considered by medical educational administration.
