mild cognitive impairment (mci) is etiologically heterogeneous, and a substantial
proportion of mci subjects will develop different dementia disorders. One subtype of this syndrome, amnestic
mci, occurs preferentially but not exclusively in prodromal AD and is characterized by defined deficits of
episodic memory. Design, setting and participants: For a 2-year, double-blinded, placebo-controlled study mci
patients, presenting with an amnestic syndrome but not necessarily based on presumed prodromal AD were
randomized. Intervention: Patients received (a) a combination of 16 mg galantamine plus 20 mg memantine, or
(b) 16 mg galantamine alone or (c) placebo. Measurements: the primary objective was to explore the differential
impact of these interventions on the progression to dementia and on cognitive changes as measured by the
ADAscog. Results: After recruitment of 232 subjects, the trial was halted before reaching the planned sample
size, because safety concerns arose in other studies with galantamine in mci. this resulted in a variable
treatment duration of 2-52 weeks. the statistical analysis plan was amended for studying cognitive effects of
discontinuing the study medication, which was done separately for galantamine and memantine, and under
double-blind conditions. there was one death, no unexpected severe adverse events, and no differences of severe
adverse events between the treatment arms. the cognitive changes on the ADAscog were not different among
the groups. Only for the subgroup of amnestic mci with presumed AD etiology, a significant improvement of
ADAscog score over placebo before the discontinuation of medication was observed, while amnestic mci
presumably due to other etiologies showed no cognitive changes with broad variation. cognitive improvement
was numerically larger in the combination treatment group than under galantamine alone. Patients who received
placebo declined as expected. Discontinuation of galantamine, either as part of the combination regimen or as
mono treatment, resulted in a transient decline of the ADAscog score in amnestic mci of presumed AD etiology,
while discontinuation of memantine did not change the cognitive status. Conclusion: in an interrupted trial with
amnestic mci subjects the combination of galantamine plus memantine were generally well tolerated. in the
subgroup of mci subjects with presumed AD etiology, a cognitive benefit of a short-term combination treatment
of galantamine plus memantine was observed, and cognitive decline occurred after discontinuation of
galantamine.
