Background: screening of depressive symptoms is recommended in recurrent fallers. Compared to the
30-item and 15-item Geriatric depression scales (Gds), the 4-item Gds is easier to administer and quicker to
perform. the association between abnormal 4-item Gds score and recurrent falls has not yet been examined. in
addition, while depressive symptoms-related gait instability is well known, the association with recurrent falls
has been few studied. Objective: 1) to examine the association between abnormal 4-item Gds score and
recurrent falls in community-dwelling older adults using original data from health examination centers (heC) of
French health insurance of Lyon, and 2) to perform a systematic review of studies that examined the association
of depressive symptoms with recurrent falls among older adults. Methods: Firstly, based on a cross-sectional
design, 2,594 community-dwellers (mean age 72.1±5.4years; 49.8% women) were recruited in heC of Lyon,
France. the 4-item Gds score (abnormal if score≥1) and recurrent falls (i.e., 2 or more falls in the past year)
were used as main outcomes. secondly, a systematic english and French Medline literature search was conducted
on May 28, 2012 with no limit of date using the following Medical subject heading (Mesh) terms "aged or
aged, 80 and over", "accidental falls", "depressive disorder" and "reccurence". the search also included the
reference lists of the retrieved articles. Results: a total of 19.0% (n=494) participants were recurrent fallers in the
cross-sectional study. abnormal 4-item Gds score was more prevalent among recurrent fallers compared to nonrecurrent
fallers (44.7% versus 25.0%, with P<0.001), and was significantly associated with recurrent falls (odd
ratio (or)=1.82 with P<0.001 for full model; or=1.86 with P<0.001 for stepwise backward model). in addition
to the current study, the systematic review found only four other studies on this topic, three of them examining
the association of depressive symptoms with recurrent falls using 30-item or 15-item Gds. all studies showed a
significant association of depressive symptoms with recurrent falls. Conclusions: the current cross-sectional
study shows an association between abnormal 4-item Gds score and recurrent falls. this association of
depressive symptoms with recurrent falls was confirmed by the systematic review. based on these results, we
suggest that recurrent falls risk assessment should involve a systematic screening of depressive symptoms using
the 4-item Gds
