The objective of this review was to elucidate the relationship between Vad and various
nutritional factors based on epidemiological studies. Background: Vascular dementia (Vad) is the second most
common type of dementia. The prevalence of Vad continues to increase as the US population continues to grow
and age. currently, control of potential risk factors is believed to be the most effective means of preventing Vad.
Thus, identification of modifiable risk factors for Vad is crucial for development of effective treatment
modalities. Nutrition is one of the main modifiable variables that may influence the development of Vad.
Methods: a systematic review of literature was conducted using the Pubmed, Web of Science, and ciNaHL
Plus databases with search parameters inclusive of vascular dementia, nutrition, and vascular cognitive
impairment (Vci). Results: Fourteen articles were found that proposed a potential role of specific nutritional
components in Vad. These components included antioxidants, lipids, homocysteine, folate, vitamin B12, and fish
consumption. antioxidants, specifically Vitamin e and c, and fatty fish intake were found to be protective
against Vad risk. Fried fish, elevated homocysteine, and lower levels of folate and vitamin B12 were associated
with increased Vad. evidence for dietary lipids was inconsistent, although elevated midlife serum cholesterol
may increase risk, while late-life elevated serum cholesterol may be associated with decreased risk of Vad.
Conclusion: currently, the most convincing evidence as to the relationship between Vad and nutrition exists for
micronutrients, particularly Vitamin e and c. exploration of nutrition at the macronutrient level and additional
long term prospective cohort studies are warranted to better understand the role of nutrition in Vad disease
development and progression. at present, challenges in this research include limitations in sample size, which
was commonly cited. also, a variety of diagnostic criteria for Vad were employed in the studies reviewed,
indicating the need for constructing a correct nosological definition of Vad for consistency and conformity in
future studies and accurate clinical diagnosis of Vad.
