In our deterministic past is a complete, efficient theory to solve very general constrained problems in the calculus of variations/optimal control theory, given by the first author. This is done in two major steps. The first step involves numerical methods for calculus of variation problems which are efficient to apply and have a guaranteed, maximal, pointwise, a priori error of O(h2)O(h2), where h is the step size between node points. The second step is to properly reformulate/recast general constrained problems in the calculus of variations/optimal control theory as calculus of variations problems with the right boundary conditions. This theory includes inequality constraints and allows for the analytic solution of simpler problems and the numerical solution of more complex problems.

For our stochastic future, we introduce a new stochastic theory of the calculus of variations/optimal control theory by using a restricted class of variations motivated by classical, deterministic methods. We consider boundary value problems for objective functionals, without averaging, and obtain necessary conditions in the form of stochastic differential systems with given boundary conditions. We emphasize that, as in the deterministic past, these stochastic systems come from critical point conditions, but unlike current stochastic methods, they yield random objective values.

In general, these systems admit anticipating solutions but they can often also be reformulated as coupled forward–backward systems with non-anticipating solutions. Thus, when we, then, average the functionals as is done in the initial formulation of current stochastic control theory, our methods with anticipating solutions sometimes yield a smaller minimum for expected cost than classical stochastic methods while duplicating the classical results for the associated non-anticipatory problem. We conjecture that (at least) in the case of linear trajectories and quadratic cost, coupled forward–backward systems with non-anticipating solutions will always yield the classical stochastic averaged solution.

Finally, we note that a major benefit of our variational approach is that we expect to duplicate the complete theory of solutions obtained by the first author for the deterministic case. In particular, we will obtain efficient methods for closed form solution for simpler problems and/or a new, efficient theory of numerical solutions, with a maximal, pointwise, a priori error estimate of O(h3/2)O(h3/2), for more difficult stochastic optimization problems. This includes a theory of constraint optimization with general equality and inequality constraints. An additional benefit of our approach is that major problems in the deterministic calculus of variations/optimal control theory can be compared to their associated stochastic problems since each can be efficiently solved by our methods.
