Wheat protein composition is important for understanding the biochemical basis of wheat quality. The objective of this study was to design a simple protein fractionation protocol with low cross-contamination and to show that these protein fractions were associated with wheat quality. The protocol consists of three sequential extractions from 100 mg of flour with 7.5% propan-1-ol and 0.3 M sodium iodide (monomeric-rich protein), 50% propan-1-ol (soluble glutenin-rich protein) and 40% propan-1-ol and 0.2% dithiothreitol (insoluble glutenin-rich protein). Nitrogen content of protein solubility groups was determined from dry residues using an automated combustion nitrogen analyser. About 90% of the total protein in the flour was solubilised. Cross-contamination of protein fractions was evaluated by SDS-PAGE, SE-HPLC and RP-HPLC. Variation in nitrogen content of the protein solubility fractions was lowest for monomeric-rich protein (<2%) and insoluble glutenin-rich protein (<4%). Three wheats with similar highmolecular-weight (HMW) glutenin subunit composition, Alpha 16, Glenlea and Roblin, varied significantly (P =< 0.05) in the proportion of monomericrich and insoluble glutenin-rich protein in the flour. Dough rheological properties were directly related to the proportion of insoluble glutenin-rich protein and inversely related to the proportion of monomeric-rich protein. The protocol was validated using an expanded set of 11 wheats which also showed that inter-cultivar differences in the proportion of monomeric-rich, insoluble glutenin-rich protein and glutenin-to-gliadin ratio in the flour governed dough rheological properties such as mixograph, farinograph and microextension tests. The protocol has merit for quality screening in wheat-breeding programmes when the sample size is too small or when time constraints limit the ability to perform traditional rheological tests. For the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food, Government of Canada, Copyright © Minister of Public Works and Government Services Canada 2003.
