Technology transfer and adoption is a complex issue in the third world which, from scientific as well as cultural, political and economical aspects, has involved not only the developing countries but also many of the Western research communities and international organizations for years. The present research investigates the success rate of technology transfer of Screw Compressor industry in Iranian companies. The research is applied from the viewpoint of research objective, but it is descriptive from the viewpoint of methodology. In order to collect data, a researcher-devised questionnaire has been used. The validity of the questionnaire was confirmed by the experts, and Cronbach's Alpha was used to confirm the reliability of the questions (? = 0.81). The research population consists of the managers of the companies that have transferred Screw Compressor technology in Iran, totaling 20 companies. Techniques of descriptive statistics including frequency table as well as inferential statistics including mean, standard deviation, variance analysis test (ANOVA) and the Duncan's grouping were used to analyze the data. The results show that 78.9 percent of the subjects have cited the role of management and the country's economic conditions, 57.89 percent have cited the effect of the country's environmental situation, 73 percent have cited the role of human resources (experts and technical staff), and 84.21 percent have cited the role of research and development as the main factor in the success or failure of the technology transfer. The average of management factor is 4.1, the research and development factor is 4, the environmental situation factor is 3.7, the economic condition factor is 3.8, and the average of human resources factor is 4.2.
The Anova test indicated that there is a significant difference among the factors affecting the success of the technology transfer of Screw compressor industry in Iran. In other words, Duncan's grouping indicated that the management, research and development, and human resources factors have a greater and more significant effect than the environmental situation and economic condition factors.

