This special issue of Nuclear Engineering and Design consists of a dozen papers that summarize the research accomplished in the DOE NERI Program sponsored project NERI 02-189 entitled “Use of Solid Hydride Fuel for Improved Long-Life LWR Core Designs”. The primary objective of this project was to assess the feasibility of improving the performance of pressurised water reactor (PWR) and boiling water reactor (BWR) cores by using solid hydride fuels instead of the commonly used oxide fuel. The primary measure of performance considered is the cost of electricity (COE). Additional performance measures considered are attainable power density, fuel bundle design simplicity, in particular for BWRs, safety, attainable discharge burnup, and plutonium (Pu) transmutation capability.

Collaborating on this project were the University of California at Berkeley Nuclear Engineering Department (UCB), Massachusetts Institute of Technology Nuclear Science and Engineering Department (MIT), and Westinghouse Electric Company Science and Technology Department. Disciplines considered include neutronics, thermal hydraulics, fuel rod vibration and mechanical integrity, and economics.

It was found that hydride fuel can safely operate in PWRs and BWRs having comparable or higher power density relative to typical oxide-fueled LWRs. A number of promising applications of hydride fuel in PWRs and BWRs were identified: (1) Recycling Pu in PWRs more effectively than is possible with oxide fuel by virtue of a number of unique features of hydride fuel-reduced inventory of 238U and increased inventory of hydrogen. As a result, the hydride-fueled core achieves nearly double the average discharge burnup and the fraction of the loaded Pu it fissions in one pass is double that of the MOX fuel. (2) Eliminating dedicated water moderator volumes in BWR cores, thus enabling significant increase of the cooled fuel rod surface area as well as the coolant flow cross-section area in a given fuel bundle volume while reducing the heterogeneity of BWR fuel bundles, thus achieving flatter pin-by-pin power distribution. The net result is an increase in the core power density and a reduction of the COE.

A number of promising oxide-fueled PWR core designs were also found in this study: (1) The optimal oxide-fueled PWR core design features a smaller fuel rod diameter (D) of 6.5 mm and a larger pitch to rod diameter (P/D) ratio of 1.39 than that presently practiced by industry of 9.5 mm and 1.326. This optimal design can provide a 27% increase in the power density and a 19% reduction in the COE provided the PWR can be designed to have the coolant pressure drop across the core increased from the reference 0.20 MPa (29 psi) to 0.414 MPa (60 psi). Under the set of constraints assumed in this work, hydride fuel was found to offer comparable power density and economics as oxide fuel in PWR cores when using fuel assembly designs featuring square lattice and grid spacers. This is because pressure drop constraints prevented achieving sufficiently high power using hydride fuel with a relatively small P/D ratio of around 1.2 or less, where it offers the highest reactivity and a higher heavy metal (HM) loading. (2) Using wire-wrapped oxide fuel rods in hexagonal fuel assemblies, it is possible to design PWR cores to operate at ∼50% higher power density than the reference PWR design that uses grid spacers and a square lattice, provided 0.414 MPa coolant pressure drop across the core could be accommodated. Uprating existing PWRs to use such cores could result in up to 40% reduction in the COE. The optimal lattice geometry is D = 9.34 mm and P/D = 1.37. The most notable advantages of wire-wraps over grid spacers are their significantly lower pressure drop, higher critical heat flux, and improved vibration characteristics.

The achievement of the highest power gains claimed in this study is possible as long as mechanical components like assembly hold-down devices (both in PWRs and in BWRs) and steam dryers (only in BWRs) are appropriately upgraded to accommodate the higher coolant pressure drop and flow velocities required for the high-performance LWR designs. The compatibility of hydride fuel with Zircaloy clad and with PWR and BWR coolants need yet be experimentally demonstrated. Additional recommendations are given for future studies that need to be undertaken before the commercial benefits from use of hydride fuel could be reliably quantified.
