As a result of the increasing anthropogenic activities in the gangetic plain, Ganga water quantity as well as quality has declined over the years. A major effort to clean Ganga, named Ganga Action Plan (GAP) was instituted by the Government of India in 1984. The emphasis in GAP was on the reduction of organic load on the river through interception, diversion and treatment of wastewater reaching the river, thus maintaining the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and dissolved oxygen (DO) levels of river within the acceptable limits. A major criticism of GAP is that the significance of river ecology has not been addressed adequately during its conception and implementation. One of the important aspects from this perspective is the photosynthetic activity in the river Ganga. It has been postulated that photosynthetic activity plays an important role in maintaining high levels of DO in Ganga, and as a result the river can assimilate high organic loads without appreciable depletion in dissolved oxygen levels. Objective of the present study was to assess the photosynthetic activity and oxygen production rates in the river and correlate these values with various water quality parameters. Most polluted stretch of Ganga, which is known as the Kannauj–Kanpur stretch was chosen for this study. Based on the results of the study, it was concluded that despite implementation of phase I of GAP, and consequent diversion and reduction of organic loading to the river, both BOD and DO levels in the river has increased in the entire Kannauj –Kanpur stretch, except at Jajmau, where anaerobically treated effluent is discharged to the river. The nitrogen levels have also increased in the entire Kannauj–Kanpur stretch. Dissolved oxygen (DO) and alkalinity in the river water vary diurnally at all sites. Chlorophyll-a levels and oxygen production rates due to photosynthesis appear to be positively influenced by phosphate levels in the river water. Chlorophyll-a levels appear to be negatively correlated to the Ammonical and total Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN) content in the river water, suggesting the possibility of release of nutrients due to algal death and decomposition under certain circumstances.
