Objective (s): Health consists of physical, mental and social domains which have reciprocal effects on each other; i.e. social health has preventive effects on physical and mental domains of health. Increment trend of social problems in the country and big cities, will be clear the importance of social health interventions, more. Changing social health situation requires designing and implementing new services based on the situation analysis of current social issues and interventions. Considering reengineering of health network system in urban areas by social determinants approach and redefining municipalities' role for it, preparing this package is an opportunity to complete the service provision in health network and to elucidate the role of municipality in social health service delivery. 
Methods: This is a qualitative, content analysis research. Data gathered by using various methods including: interviewing to municipality officials, group discussion in designing team, reviewing related research articles, reports and documents in deputy for social affair of Tehran municipality. Information was utilized for priority setting and designing the packages. Neighborhoods' health councils and regional municipalities officials comments and also existing indices were used for setting the priorities. In designing packages and proposed interventions, experts opinions, review of literatures and analysis of available capacities and assets were used. 
Results: The defined social health service packages are: common package for promoting social healthy behaviors and special packages for reducing substance abuse, crime, child abuse and divorce. Each package has 3 sections: necessity of service, explanation of services and requirement for implementing the services. The following six principals were agreed for designation:
1. Selected services should be based on the regional problems and assets.
2. Integrating public partnership and intersectoral collaboration in service provision.
3. Considering primary, secondary and tertiary prevention in each services package.
4. Using national and international best available evidences for designation.
5. Defining requirements of implementing and sustaining the services.
6. Based on the upstream rules and regulations 
Conclusion: The new packages are based on the social health promotion approach in comparison to the existing social issues packages which theirs programs and protocols are more treatment oriented, combating disasters and social harms. On the other hand, in new packages, intersectoral collaboration and using local assets has been emphasized but the old protocols are based on governmental limited resources. If  we believe that " Municipality is the important social health steward in urban areas" instead of " Municipality responsible for cleaning the face of city from harms such as, addicts, beggars, homeless and …" then we could ascertain that the designed packages will be implementable by municipalities in cooperation to all urban organizations. In order to sensitizing and political commitment, forming regional social health council under supervision of mayor and with cooperation of representatives of all governmental and non governmental and private section has been proposed.

