Recent approvals by CMS (HCFA) for reimbursement of positron emission tomography (PET) scans fuels the rapid grow of the PET market, thus creating the need for more affordable dedicated PET scanners. The objective of the work presented here was the development of a BGO position-sensitive block with similar detector area (40 mm * 40 mm) and same number of crystals (8 * 8) as the block of a commercial BGO PET, using the less expensive photomultiplier quadrant sharing (PQS) technique. This block is coupled to four single-anode 40-mm diameter photomultipliers (PMT) instead of the 19-mm PMT used in a popular commercial BGO PET, and each PMT is shared by four adjacent detector blocks. Potentially, this design needs only 25% of the number of PMT used in the commercial BGO PET. In order not to waste the unused half-row of PMT at the edges of a detector panel/module when the module is made up solely of square blocks, an extended rectangular block has to be developed for the edge-blocks in the module, which maximized the use of the PMT and minimized the gap between modules. Only the extended block needs to be developed to derive the design for all the blocks in the module because the symmetric square block uses the same light-distributing partitions as those along the short side of the extended rectangular block. White-paint masks applied with accurate templates and airbrush were fine-tuned for every pair of adjacent crystals. The experimental block developed in this study provided good crystaldecoding. The composite energy spectrum of all 64 crystals showed a prominent photopeak. The worst crystal sitting in the air space between 4 round PMTs still has 60% of the signal pulse height as the best crystal. The average energy resolution was 21.8% for 511 keV gamma (range 17% 28.7%) that compared well with the 22% - 44% measured with GE and CTI blocks. The image resolution provided by the PQS blocks is expected to be comparable to that of commercial BGO PETs as similar size crystals were decoded.
