Adaptation to sublethal exposure to crude oil by phytoplankton is poorly understood. Use of chemical dispersants for oil spill remediation increases petroleum hydrocarbon concentrations in water, while exposing marine organisms to potentially toxic concentrations of dispersant. Heat shock proteins (hsps) have been found to serve as an adaptive and protective mechanism against environmental stresses. The objective of this project was to examine the induction of hsps in Isochrysis galbana, a golden-brown algae, following exposure to the water-accommodated fraction (WAF) of Prudhoe Bay crude oil (PBCO) and PBCO chemically dispersed with Corexit 9527® (dispersed oil: DO). Initial experiments using 35S-labeled amino acids and 2-dimensional electrophoresis with subsequent western blotting identified and confirmed hsp60, a member of the chaperonin family of stress proteins, as being efficiently induced by heat shock in this species. One-dimensional SDS PAGE and western blotting, with hsp60 antibodies and chemiluminesence detection, were used to quantitate hsp60 following exposure to a range of environmental temperatures and concentrations of WAF and DO preparations. I. galbana cultured in 22 parts per thousand (‰) salinity showed a statistically significant increase (p<0.05) in hsp60 after exposure to 25, 30, and 35°C for 1 h compared to controls (20°C), while 34‰ cultures showed no significant increase in hsp60 with increasing temperature. Cultures (22 and 34‰) exposed to varying doses of WAF and DO exhibited statistically significant (p<0.05) increases in levels of hsp60 in all cases. A dose-related response was observed in all exposures (r2≥0.90) with the exception of 34‰ WAF. In independent exposures, a dose-related hsp60 response to naphthalene, a relatively abundant water-soluble aromatic hydrocarbon, was observed in both 22 and 34‰ cultures. Results of this study are consistent with previous studies in other species documenting increases in hsp60 levels with exposure to xenobiotics. Further studies are investigating the protective function of hsp60 against the toxic effects of exposure to WAF and DO preparations.
