The objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that gamma- glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) catalytic activity and protein level in the initial segment are regulated by testicular factors. In the rat epididymis, levels of GGT catalytic activity were initial segment > caput > corpus = cauda. GGT catalytic activity and protein level in the initial segment decreased after efferent duct ligation (EDL) for 3 days, but were recovered when initial segment pieces were incubated with ovine or rat rete testis fluid (oRTF or rRTF, respectively). Factors responsible for the recovery were shown to be greater than 10 kDa and protein-like, but these factors were not androgen-binding protein or testosterone in oRTF. Further experiments were designed to test the hypothesis that growth factors within oRTF and rRTF regulate GGT catalytic activity and GGT protein level. Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) but not epidermal growth factor recovered GGT catalytic activity and protein level in the initial segment following 3-day EDL. Western blot analyses also revealed that bFGF-like proteins were present in rRTF, epididymal luminal fluid, and rat initial segment homogenate, and that the level of bFGF-like proteins declined in the initial segment following 3-day EDL. Using a bFGF monoclonal antibody, a small amount of bFGF-like proteins was found to be also present in oRTF. Our studies suggest that bFGF is one of the testicular factors involved in the regulation of epididymal GGT catalytic activity and protein level. Since decreased GGT catalytic activity caused by 3-day EDL in the rat initial segment was also recovered by a tumor promoter, phorbol 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate, it is possible that a signal transduction pathway is involved in the regulation of GGT catalytic activity and GGT protein level by testicular factors. Western blot analyses also indicated that the 43-kDa bFGF-like protein in the lumen of the rat epididymis originates from the testis, is concentrated in the initial segment, and is reabsorbed by the epididymal epithelia from proximal to distal epididymal regions.
