Very recently, Pan et al. [Proceedings of the 9th Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, GECCO07, pp. 126–33] presented a new and novel discrete differential evolution algorithm for the permutation flowshop scheduling problem with the makespan criterion. On the other hand, the iterated greedy algorithm is proposed by [Ruiz, R., & Stützle, T. (2007). A simple and effective iterated greedy algorithm for the permutation flowshop scheduling problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 177(3), 2033–49] for the permutation flowshop scheduling problem with the makespan criterion. However, both algorithms are not applied to the permutation flowshop scheduling problem with the total flowtime criterion. Based on their excellent performance with the makespan criterion, we extend both algorithms in this paper to the total flowtime objective. Furthermore, we propose a new and novel referenced local search procedure hybridized with both algorithms to further improve the solution quality. The referenced local search exploits the space based on reference positions taken from a reference solution in the hope of finding better positions for jobs when performing insertion operation. Computational results show that both algorithms with the referenced local search are either better or highly competitive to all the existing approaches in the literature for both objectives of makespan and total flowtime. Especially for the total flowtime criterion, their performance is superior to the particle swarm optimization algorithms proposed by [Tasgetiren, M. F., Liang, Y. -C., Sevkli, M., Gencyilmaz, G. (2007). Particle swarm optimization algorithm for makespan and total flowtime minimization in permutation flowshop sequencing problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 177(3), 1930–47] and [Jarboui, B., Ibrahim, S., Siarry, P., Rebai, A. (2007). A combinatorial particle swarm optimisation for solving permutation flowshop problems. Computers & Industrial Engineering, doi:10.1016/j.cie.2007.09.006]. Ultimately, for Taillard’s benchmark suite, four best known solutions for the makespan criterion as well as 40 out of the 90 best known solutions for the total flowtime criterion are further improved by either one of the algorithms presented in this paper.
