  Evaluation of the Role of Social Capital in Rural area development Case study: Mashhad Maighan County in Arak Township

Hossein Farahani: Assistant professor in Geography and Rural Planning, University of  Zanjan
Jamshid einali: Assistant professor in Geography and Rural Planning, University of Zanjan.   
Somaye abdoli: M. A student in Geography and Rural Planning, University of Zanjan. 

Abstract 
The concept of social capital, as an interdisciplinary concept, has been considered by many branches of humanities. This concept has been studied in the social and economical analysis related to the development of rural communities and it emphasize on the available resources in rural. These sources include human relations, networks and institutions in the social structure. Therefore, in order to achieve stable rural development, access to social is essential. This study enamines & analysis the role of social capital in rural development according to three Pantum idenes (trust, partnerships and networks). The influential role of social capital on the quality of life cannot be in this study back ground variables such as the subjective quality of life and disregarded. So, objective quality of life and social capital was measured. In this research descriptive statistics and inferential analysis based on obtained data from survey. The data was analysis through methods of statistical correlation, t-test, kruskal-wallis, multiple regression, analysis of variance, path analysis, Maurice model. And TOPSIS model is used. For the purpose of these study 25 rurals from Mashhad-e- Meighan County in Arak Province, trough sampling was selected. The required data collected through two questionnaires including 135 household and 13 authorities. The findings indicated that there is a significant relationship between social capital and the increase in the quality of life in the region studied. And it showed that there is a significant relationship between the increase of social capital and the social and physical dimensions of rural development. Social participate largely affected high quality of life in Mashhad mighan country.    

Key words: Social capital, Quality of life, rural development, Mashhad Myghan. 

