Abstract
Introduction: First hours after surgery is a critical time. Patients need to be closely observed due to post anesthesia process and potential physical problems which can occur during that time. So it is necessary to use a standard tool for patients control in PACU which is a scale for discharge and transfer to other wards.
Objective: This is a cross-sectional study and 3rd part of another study which aims to design a valid tool for patients control in PACU. It also aims to determine the validity of patients control tool in PACU of Iran operation rooms.
Materials and Methods: Data collection instrument was a questionnaire containing items on the standard care of the patients in PACU which has been sent to anesthesiologists of all medical universities within Iran.
This study seeks to design a valid Instrument for patient control in Recovery rooms/ Post Anesthesia care unit (PACU) in Iran. It was based on special goals and consisted of 3 parts: instrument definition, determination of instrument items and determination of instrument development validity for patient control in recovery rooms
As for the first and second parts of the study, 40 items were presented for instrument development. After checking for face validity, 34 items at first and at last 19 items were added about respiratory, cardiac, urinary and nerve system, physician order, and nursing note for patients after surgery in recovery room.
Results: Following data analysis and sample guidance opinions, this protocol has been presented for care of the patients in PACU, to be used  in all educational hospitals of Iran. In total, 92.2% of samples agreed on the use of the designed protocol for patient control in PACU. The results of internal consistency revealed alphacronbach of % 87.5- %91.1for factors and % 96.1for whole tool control in PACU.
Conclusion: The developed tool for patients control in PACU seems to be a valid and reliable means for patients control related to “Respiratory, Cardiovascular, Neuromuscular and Urinary systems” in PACU
Conflict of interest: non declared

