Introduction: AIDS is the most serious health problem and the most deadly infectious disease in the present century. Emerging of disease and lack of sufficient awareness about the disease can easily expose the adolescents to the risk of disease. Increased knowledge and change in inaccurate beliefs and behaviors are the best way for prevention of disease. 
Objective: This study was conducted to determine knowledge and attitude of high school students in Bonab city regarding AIDS.
Methods: In this cross sectional study, 176 high school students in Bonab city were chosen by two-stage cluster sampling method. Data was collected through a three-part questionnaire (including demographic characteristics, 23 items to assess knowledge and 9 items for attitude). The validity and reliability of the questionnaire was confirmed by content validity and Cronbach's alpha. Collected data were analyzed by SPSS software using independent t test, chi-square, ANOVA, Scheffe test and Pearson correlation statistical tests.
Results: Findings of study in relation to knowledge  showed that the mean score of knowledge  about nature of disease and preventive approaches, (5.25±1.82), awareness about the transmission ways, (9.09±3), and the general awareness of the disease was moderate (14.34±4.23). Two variables of father's occupation (P=0.018) and having previous knowledge about the disease (P=0.000) were correlated with the awareness of students, so students who had the lowest scores had unemployed fathers. Although the majority of students were in moderate level for knowledge there were misconceptions about AIDS and the transmission ways of disease among students.  Results showed that the mean of attitude scores was 24.2±5.67 and the majority of them had a good attitude towards the disease. Variables of father's occupation (P = 0.03) and mother's occupation (P=0.02) showed significant results with the attitude scores. Knowledge and attitude scores of students also were correlated positively together (r = 0.41 and P = 0.000).                                            
Conclusion: Although the knowledge level of students seemed to be moderate, there are misconceptions and unfavorable attitudes about the routes of transmission that should be corrected.We propose to develop strategies to reduce the risk of HIV in schools. Efforts should be intensified to change attitude and performance among the high school students in Bonab. 
