Introduction: Congestive heart failure (CHF) is one of the most important chronic diseases in the world that these patients are faced with various physical and psychological stressful factors which leads to decreasing quality of  life. Social support by all sources can lead to decreasing problems in CHF patients and increasing quality of life in them
Objective: The aim of study was to determine quality of  life in CHF patients and comparing it with QOL of healthy people and also determine the social support of CHF patients, and measuring the relationship between QOL and social support in CHF patients.  
Methods: This is a correlationalstudy and samples were chosen by simple sampling. For this purpose, 125 eligible CHF patients who referred to hospitals in city of Maragheh, and 125 healthy people were selected simultaneously during a period of ten months. Data were collected using an integrated three part questionnaire including demographics, quality of  life, and social support completed by interview. Data after collection were analyzed using SPSS (Ver.15), descriptive statistics (Mean. Median, Frequency, Standard Deviation) and Inferential statistics (T-independent test, Chi-square, Exact Fisher test, Pearson correlational test, Multiple Regression.
Results: Findings indicated that quality of life was undesirable in 49.6% and had significant difference with QOL of healthy people(P < 0.0001). In subsectors of quality of life, social dimension was desirable in 83.2% of patients and showed no significant difference with healthy people, while in physical dimension (63.2%) and psychological dimension (63.2%) in most of the patients were undesirable and in most of the healthy people were desirable. Social support in 51.2% of CHF patients were desirable, and there was a direct and significant relationship between these two variables (p < 0.03, r = 0.2). 
Conclusion: In attention to positive relationship between QOL and social support it is suggested that health care planners and managers in addition to increasing instrumental supports, emotional and informational support should be promoted in order to improve patients’ quality of life. 

