Background: Drug delivery systems were developed to improve the efficiency of drugs and minimize toxic side effects during the 1980s and 1990s. Nanoparticles have the ability to deliver a wide range of drugs to different areas of the body for sustained periods of time.
Objective: The aim of this study was to prepare and optimize chitosan nanoparticles as carrier of anti-alzheimer tacrine drug and to estimate particle size by chemometrics.
Methods: This experimental study was conducted at chemistry school of Imam Khomeini International University in Qazvin during 2011-2012. Chitosan nanoparticles were prepared by spontaneous emulsification method. In order to optimize the method of chitosan nanoparticles preparation, Design of Experiment (DOE) was employed using Box-Behnken design. Also, chitosan nanoparticles containing tacrine were prepared using the optimal synthesis method provided by the experimental design. The relationship between particle size and Diffuse Reflectance Infrared Fourier Transform (DRIFT) Spectroscopy was employed to introduce a method for estimation of particle size in chitosan nanoparticles. Partial least squares (PLS) technique was applied to estimate average particle size based on DRIFT spectra. Forty two chitosan nanoparticles samples with different particle size were analyzed by DRIFT spectrometry and the data were processed by PLS-NAS. Size and morphology of nanoparticles were determined by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM).
Findings: According to Box–Behnken experimental design results, 0.52% NaCl as an electrolyte, 10% Span 80 as a surfactant and 4.86 mL  Glutaraldehyde Saturated Toluene )GST( as a chemical cross-linking agent are optimum amounts to prepare the lowest size and spherical morphology of nanoparticles. The mean particle size of the designed nanoparticles was 33.64 to 74.87 nm. Percent yield and drug loading percent of chitosan nanoparticles that were synthesized according to the optimal method were 90% and 13.4±0.51%, respectively. The estimated sizes of chitosan nanoparticles give promise to a robust and reliable calibration that were confirmed with a correlation coefficient (R2) of 0.98 and a Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of 3.59.
Conclusion:  With regards to the results, an optimized method for the preparation of chitosan nanoparticles as carrier of anti-alzheimer drug can be presented with smaller particle size and spherical morphology using Box-Behnken experimental design.

