Introduction: Hospital information system (HIS) plays an important role in enhancing the quality of
remedy in hospitals. HIS is considered as an information system that may have great influence on the
effectiveness and efficiency of hospital management. Evaluation system is one of the most important
issues that is greatly emphasized in the management system. This paper evaluate HIS based on Ahituv and
Neumann model. The general objective of this study was to assess HIS in hospitals where Kowsar
software is in use.
Methods: This study used a descriptive-field survey approach and carried out in 2012. The data were
collected via both field and library sources. Subset of this research contained ten governmental hospitals
under supervision of Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Iran. Indeed, the Kowsar software was
installed in all the studied hospitals. Since the number of subjects was 209, it was feasible to use all staff.
The volunteers were given localized questionnaires based on Ahituv and Neumann model indices (time,
content, and structure) to assess the HIS. The questionnaire included 37 items with regard to the fivechoice
likert scale. The elite panel confirmed questionnaire content validity. In addition, reliability was
calculated via Cronbach’s alpha (0.85).
Results: Data analysis showed that there were two true hypotheses among the three. In fact, both time and
content were verified with 0.95 reliability rate but the structure was not in an acceptable level.
Conclusion: The HIS governing the organization was in a proper condition in terms of timeline, accuracy,
relevancy, and appropriateness of brevity; however, in terms of frequency, period, and universality it was
not satisfactory and needed modification. HIS basically requires restructuring and also detailed
information and several figures and charts to illustrate statistical outputs. Altogether, a newer version of
Kowsar can be released to overcome the drawbacks.
Keywords: Hospital Information Systems; Evaluation; Hospitals; Ahituv and Neuman Model
