This paper presents thermodynamic investigation and environmental consideration of combined Stirling-organic
Rankine cycle (ORC) power cycle. Combined cycle can be assisted by solar energy and an ORC used as an annular
cold-side heat rejector for a free piston Stirling cycle. ORC can increase the power output efficiency by 4% to 8%
compared to that of a Stirling standard cycle. Operating temperatures of ORC are between 80°C and 140°C. The
main objective of this work is to model the combined cycle for performance optimization in respect to the use of
several different working fluids with relevant temperature ranges. Total power efficiency in the range of 34% to 42%
was observed for different cases. Several working fluids in the ORC were investigated from a thermal, operational,
and environmental point of view. Working fluids considered were FC72, FC87, HFE7100, HFE7000, Novec649, npentane,
n-decane, R245fa, and toluene. Practical issues like thermodynamic cycle efficiency, latent heat, density,
toxicity, flammability, ozone depletion potential, global warming potential, and atmospheric lifetime are considered.
Considering the cycle efficiency, n-decane shows the best performance at both levels of temperature supposed.
However, this fluid has the highest saturated vapor specific volume (resulting in a larger condenser) and the lowest
condenser saturation pressure (higher infiltration of non-condensable gases). The best candidates for the cycle
regarding all the considered aspects were found to be toluene, HFE7100, and n-pentane. Comparing these three
fluids, toluene presents the highest efficiency, the highest impact on the environment, the biggest vapor specific
volume, and the minimum mass flow rate in Rankine cycle, therefore decreasing the pump power consumption.
N-pentane exhibits the lowest cycle efficiency and vapor specific volume, but this fluid has super-atmospheric
saturation pressure advantage. HFE7100 is a good working fluid from environmental and safety point of view.
