Objective: The growing role of the internet in guiding students in Universities and higher education concerned officials about the effective use of this new technology. This research aims at determining the role of undergraduate librarianship on attitude of librarianship students in University of Isfahan and Isfahan University of Medical Sciences toward internet based on ISA model. 
Methodology: the research method was descriptive survey and  
The population consisted of all undergraduate students of librarianship in University of Isfahan and Isfahan University of Medical sciences (91 people) in 2010-2011. Due to limited population, the census method was used. To gather the data, the standard questionnaire “Internet Anxiety Scale” is used and it consists of four subscales of internet anxiety, usefulness of internet, and enjoyment of internet, and feeling of self-efficacy in using internet. To determine the validity of the questionnaire, the content validity was used. Using Cronbach’s Alpha, the reliability of the questionnaire was estimated 0.96.To analyze the data, at descriptive statistics level frequency, percentage, mean and standard deviation in the form of table and at inferential statistics single-sample t test, multivariate analysis of variance (Manova) were used.
Findings: According to the findings, undergraduate librarianship had positive effect on anxiety, usefulness, enjoyment and feeling of self-efficacy in using internet. Yet its effect on reducing anxiety in men was more than women, and usefulness of internet, enjoyment of internet and feeling of self-efficacy in using internet in single students were more than married students. The university and different ages have had no effects on students’ attitudes but there was significant difference in the self-efficacy between first year students of librarianship and the final year students of librarianship.
Conclusion: Undergraduate librarianship had positive effect on students’ attitudes toward these four components in mentioned universities. The officials are expected to establish and develop effective courses based on these research components.

