Objective: The aim of this study was to evaluate the quality level of services provided by the Regional Information Center for Science and Technology (RICeST) using the Six Sigma methodology. 
Methodology: The studied population in this research includes the users of (RICeST). 120 users in this center have been chosen as the samples by a simple random way. Data collection tool in this study was the LibQUAL Questionnaire. Using this questionnaire, the gap between the customers' expectations and perceptions was identified and analyzed. Data were analyzed using the statistical software "Spss" and the mean and standard deviation were calculated for the obtained data. In each of the evaluated cases, the calculated standard deviation was compared with the sigma level in the output table for the types of sigma in order to specify the qualitative efficiency of services. By this way, the error rate in each of the provided services has been determined. 
Findings: the findings showed  the employees in the Regional Center for the Science and Technology Information have been able to meet the users' minimum expectations in this center in all cases except the option "The courteous staff"; and have allocated the efficiency 50% which is equal to 500,000 errors per million. In the other words, the average rate was true in all raised options about the staff in this center. The efficiency, 69. 20 percent, obtained from the users view about the quality of existing resources in this center represents their relative satisfaction with the current condition. Only about the option "the presence of a website in the center" the level of users' expectations has been equal to the actual level and the efficiency 99. 97 percent been achieved. The quality of library space at the actual level has been lower than the maximum level of users' expectation, but it has been higher than the level of users' minimum expectations. The efficiency 69. 20 percent about the center space indicates 308,000 errors per million. In this case, it has been far from achieving the desired level or the maximum users' expectations.
Conclusion: The results showed that in most cases, Regional Information Center for Science and Technology require to increase the actual level of service. Near the maximum level of expectations with actual service, will result to increase efficiency service quality and the Users ‘satisfaction.

