Fuel cell technology using hydrogen energy is an advanced green energy technology for the future
use. This is green, sustainable, clean and very environmental friendly. Green house gases emission from
industrial activities has been proven beyond doubt as the main cause of global warming and climate changes.
The finite world energy supply that consists nearly 90% of fossil fuel which is depleted; an energy crisis
because of widening fossil fuel production and demand gaps. Many nations responded to anticipate energy
crisis by diversifying their fuel resources to include renewable and alternative energy and developing green
energy technology for the future. Despite political announcements on renewable energy, fossil fuels will
continue to dominate energy resources for some time to come and carbon emission will increase but global
nuclear energy expansion is uncertain because of international tensions and general public fears of another
Chemobyl or Fogoshima disasters or a nuclear terrorist attack. Biofuels are plagued by the conflict between
crops for fuel and crops for food and there is a shift of interest towards crop biomass wastes. The further
expansion of hydrogen energy is constrained by costs and safety in hydrogen transport and storage. Fuel cell
research and development has shifted from older AFC, PAFC and MCFC whose entry into the market were
stalled by intractable operational and durability problems, to more promising PEMFC, DMFC and SOFC. A new
type of fuel cell, the microbial fuel cell (MFC) is also gaining some attention because of sustainable way of
simultaneously reducing BOD and COD of wastewater and provide power; combined wastewater treatment and
power (CWTP). The main thrust in PEMFC research and development is cost reduction of membrane and
electrocatalyst by substitution of cheap and more efficient organic-inorganic nanocomposite membranes and
nanoinorganic electrocatalyst as well as lower electrocatalyst loading and cost reduction of bipolar plate by
material reformulation with nanomaterials for injection or compression molding. In addition, cost reduction can
also be achieved by reduction of system complexity using non-hydrated or self-hydrated membranes that
eliminate water management sub-system and CO tolerant anodes that eliminate CO removal of reform ate
hydrogen feed. PEMFC system efficiency can be further enhanced by better design of flow field in bipolar
plates and fuel and air manifold in the stack as well as through process optimization using process system
engineering tools. The main thrust of SOFC research and development is reduction of its operational
temperature by replacement with low temperature electrolytes, anodes and cathodes. Future DMFC
development focuses on methanol crossover reduction, desired water management and low manufacturing
costs. Also for future development on MBC focuses on understanding the electron transfer mechanism and
redox reactions in cells and developing more efficient nanostructured electrodes and cell immobilization. The
main objective in hydrogen production from liquid fuels are in the development of low temperature auto-thermal
steam reforming catalysts, purification of reformate hydrogen through pressure swing adsorption and membrane
processes as well as membrane reactors and higher hydrogen storage capacity in carbon nano-tubes and other
nanostructures. The main focus on sustainable hydrogen production is photolysis of water into hydrogen and
oxygen in solar photovoltaic-electrolyzer system, direct solar photoelectrochemical reactors and solar photobiological
fermentors.
