Background: Tuberculosis is considered a prevalent and hazardous disease in
developing countries. Recognition and control of TB risk factors are of special
significance. This study sought to determine the frequency of occupational
silica exposure in TB patients residing in Lorestan Province.
Materials and Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted in 2012. List
of registered TB patients was obtained from the Infectious Disease Control
Center of Lorestan Province. Data were collected from 871 TB patients through
interview and filling out a checklist. Also, 429 subjects presenting to Health
Centers of Lorestan Province with respiratory complaints suspicious of TB
(which was ruled out) were entered the study as the control group for
comparison of frequency of silica occupational exposure. Understudy subjects
based on the degree of silica exposure were categorized into 4 groups of no
exposure, mild exposure, moderate exposure and severe exposure and
compared in terms of frequency of TB incidence.
Results: Frequency of silica exposure was significantly higher in TB patients
compared to controls (P < 0.001, OR: 3.39, 95%CI=2.63-4.36). Additionally,
frequency of TB was greater in patients with probable silicosis and silica
exposed subjects compared to those with no history of silica exposure (P < 0.05).
Logistic regression analysis revealed significant associations between moderate
and severe silica exposure and TB frequency. Significant correlations were also
detected between age, work experience, level of education, male gender and
cigarette smoking with TB frequency (P < 0.05).
Conclusion: The study results revealed that silica exposure was prevalent
among TB patients and frequency of TB increased by increased intensity of
silica exposure, older age, higher work experience, lower level of education,
male gender and cigarette smoking. Provided that our study results are
confirmed by prospective studies, TB screening is recommended for workers
with occupational silica exposure particularly those with higher work
experience.
