Background: Evaluation of the lymph nodes in cases with lung cancer for
diagnosis or staging has been considered since many years ago. Various
methods have been developed for obtaining a sample from lymph nodes. This
study was conducted in a research institute with high patient turnover and
aimed at evaluating the diagnostic yield of TBNA and effective factors on
diagnosis and related complications in patients with pulmonary lesions.
Materials and Methods: Our understudy population included all patients
suffering from undiagnosed intrathoracic lymphadenopathies with no
accompanying pulmonary lesions on chest CT scan who had been hospitalized
in Masih Daneshvari Hospital or referred to its bronchoscopy unit. After
determining the anatomic location of lymphadenopathy (LAP), patients
underwent fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FOB) and TBNA using 19-gauge eXcelon
aspiration needle. Four samples were taken from each patient from the same
LAP location. In this study, 39 patients were evaluated.
Results: The most common anatomic location of lymph node involvement
among our understudy patients was the paratracheal area which was involved
in 14 (45.2%) patients followed by subcarinal area in 12 cases (38.7%) and hilar
involvement also in 12 cases (38.7%). Five patients (15.6%) had
lymphadenopathies in other anatomical locations. Evaluation of the aspirates
obtained by TBNA showed that the sample was adequate and diagnostic in 21
patients (55.26%), adequate but non-diagnostic in 9 patients (23.68%) and
inadequate in 8 cases (21.06%). Definite diagnosis was made in 22 patients
among which the most common diagnosis was atypical and malignant lesions
in 11 cases (50%) followed by sarcoidosis in 8 (36.36%), tuberculosis (TB) in 2
(9.09%) and other diagnoses in 1 (4.55%) case.
Conclusion: Based on our study results, TBNA was diagnostic in more than
half the cases. Various studies have reported a wide range of results in this
respect but all of them including ours emphasize on the acceptable diagnostic
yield of this technique.
