We are deeply grieved to inform you the sad demise of Dr. Abolhassan Zia- Zarifi, (20 August
1926- 4 October 2010), The Honorary Member of the International Union against Tuberculosis
and Lung Diseases (IUATLD).
We NRITLD family conveys our heartfelt condolence on this very sad demise. We pray that the
departed soul finds eternal peace and that the bereaved family finds the strength to overcome this
tragic loss.
Abolhassan Zia-Zarifi began his public health career in 1952 with the Iranian Ministry of Health,
and culminated with his position as the Director General of Iran's Laboratories (1975–1979) and his
establishing and directing Iran's National Reference Laboratories, equivalent to the Centers for
Disease Control (1965–1975).
Moreover, he became a consultant to the World Health Organization in the Middle East, Asia, and
Africa, including stints working against cholera in Saudi Arabia in the early 1970s, in Ethiopia, the
Central African Republic, and Congo (1972). He remained a proficient member of the WHO's
Emergency Team from 1974 to 1996.
His crowning success was the establishment of Iran's National Reference Laboratories as a center
for epidemiology and national standard setting. The Reference Laboratories significantly modernized
Iran's public health system and were recognized internationally as a model for maintaining rigorous
scientific principles in difficult ground conditions.
He acted fervently as member of many international committees e.g.
British tuberculosis association (since 1967)
IUATLD Paris (since 1963)
IUATLD bulletin authors council (1974 to 1991)
American Society of Microbiology (ASM) (since 1973)
New York Academic of Science Association (1991)
Dr. Zia-Zarifi was a prolific author. He has written, edited, and contributed to dozens of books,
pamphlets, and scientific articles.
Above All, He was a dedicated combatant in the struggle against tuberculosis to the last hours of
his productive life.
Djavad Tabatabaee, M.D
Advisor, National Research Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, Tehran-Iran.
OBITUARY
Dr.Abolhassan Zia-Zarifi, (20 August 1926 - 4 October
2010), The Honorary Members of the Union, IUATLD.
The world lost; one of the most important Iranian Scientists and a model for maintaining rigorous
scientific principles in difficult ground conditions.
"A politician who fought for the Iranian people rights, fought for Democracy and Development, for
Iranian women rights, and for Human rights in all corners of the world"
We indeed lost a writer, an artist, a concerned author and on the top scientist who was voted an
Honorary Member of The International Union against Tuberculosis and Lung (The Union).
• Director General of Iran’s Laboratories (1975-1979)
• WHO consultant in the Middle East, Asia, and Africa including stints working against cholera in
Saudi Arabia in the early 1970s.
• The crowning success of the establishment of Iran’s National Reference Laboratories as a center
for epidemiology and national standard setting.
• Some of his publication: The story of Life (2006), Biosafety Guidelines for Health Care
Workers against Viral Hepatitis and AIDS (2001), Unanswered Questions in Extraordinary
Years (Autobiography; editor)(1997), and the Bacteriology of TB.
Expert Reviewer of Anti-infective Therapy 6:5, 713-724 Abolhassan Zia-Zarifi, Ali Akbar
Velayati, and a number of other articles.
I had the honor of meeting him and enjoying a chat with a moving encyclopedia. God bless his
soul, and I hope his name be given to the street where he was born and the lab where had worked and
indeed by all of us.
Professor Asma Elsony
Director,
The Epidemiological Laboratory (Epi-Lab)
P.O Box: 193 Khartoum Sudan
aelsony@yahoo.com, aelsony@iuatld.org
Past President of International Union
against Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases
