Purpose: Thise main objective of this article is to presents results from a survey on the f users’ interfaces environment of Persian journals databases from the viewpoints of Iranian public librarians. 

Methodology: Adopting a survey approach, this study This is a survey research which evaluates examines the views and experience of public librarians about attitudes of the subjects of study towards about the user interface environment of  Persian journals databases, taking into account five dimensions and 58 criteria.
Findings: Librarians believed thatFindings reveal that the user interface environment of Persian journal databases with numerical mean equal to 180.8 was at the satisfactory level. It appeared that the dimensions of public information (mean:43.9), searching (mean: 81.3), retrieval (mean: 33.1), were at satisfactory level, and demonstration (mean: 16.2), user- friendliness (mean: 7.13) were at unsatisfactory level. In addition, the findings showed that the Users’ interfaces environment of Persian journal databases with numerical mean equal to 180.8 was at the satisfactory level.
Originality/Value: This study can with indicating toIlluminating the strengths and weaknesses of the environment of users’ interfaces environment of Persian journals databases, this study help their journal database producers in designing better interface environments for users’ interfaces. It, helps institutions to selecting the best databases that best meet which match with the needs of their patrons. In addition, Iit also will helps users having experiencing easy and fast access to their required information through via a better users’ interface.
Keywords: Users’ Interface; Databases;  Persian Journals Index, Nemayeh Institute, Public library.Purpose: This paper identifies educational needs of public library librarians in Khozestan province, Iran.
Method: this study  was carried out using descriptive approach and survey method. Researcher made questionnaire is used for data collection and descriptive statistic applied for data analysis. 
Findings: 71.43 percent of public librarians of Khozestan province are trained by in-service education programs. They noticed that information technology changes are the main cause for their needs and requirements to expand skills. Budget shortage is identified as a main obstacle in the way of implementation of these programs. They think that in-service education is urgent in the fields like internet skills, reference service, adult education, resource organization, children services, and education helper books. 
Originality/Value: results of the study could be helpful for administrators in designing in-service programs concerning librarians’ educational needs.

