Purpose: This research tries toidentifies and  introduce and evaluates the librarians ICT skills, attitudes and factors related their ICT skills. 
Methodology: Statistical population includes all Yazd public library staffs and a questionnaire used for assessing librarian ICT skills in four main dimensions, including skills in general software, hardware skills, applicative and specialize software skills and communicating and searching skills. The priority of librarians’ skills has been considering by AHP technique and hypothesis testing done by one sample t-test, Pearson correlation and ANOVA tests.
Findings: According to research findings, applicative and specialize software skills, skills in general software, communicating and searching skills and hardware skills known as the most important public library staff required skills, respectively. Findings reveal the librarians’ positive attitude about ICT and desirable level of hardware skills, between four dimensions of ICT skills. Educational level, knowing English language and librarians’ attitude considering as the affecting factors of the librarian ICT skills.
Originality/Value: Evaluating librarian ICT skills and factors relating to them can be set as the base of technical knowledge and professional behavior, improving election, recruitment, education, compensation systems, consultation and performance evaluation and finally representing better services by libraries.
Keywords: Public Libraries, Information and Communication Technology, Skill, AHP, Yazd ProvincePurpose: The objective of this research is to identify and prioritize barriers and problems young adults face using services of public libraries in Semnan.
Method: This applied study is descriptive. This research focuses on the youth generation between the age of 17 and 40  in Semnan. Simple Random Sampling is used. 450 questionnaires were distributed  of which 389 were returned and used. In addition to descriptive statistics AHP technique was used to prioritize barriers.
Findings: The most important obstacle was “lack of enough books for young people “ the other factors such as : “ failing to update  references materials” , “lack of motivation and time to study “and “ lack of proper physical condition of libraries” were in the other orders respectively. 
Originality/value: The results of this research can help libraries in removing barriers and creating favorable conditions to attract the youth to libraries.

