Introduction: Pressure ulcer is a painful, disabling process which has side effects such as decreased quality of life and increased treatment cost in treatment process.  Therefore it is important to assess at risk patients using a reliable objective criteria in order to take preventive measures.  Objective: The purpose of this study was to determine the predictive value of Braden scale in occurrence of pressure ulcer among hospitalized patients in educational and therapeutic centers of Rasht city, Iran.
Methods: This is a cross-sectional descriptive analytic study. Samples were chosen by consecutive method consisted of 350 hospitalized patients in orthopedic, ICUs, neuromedical wards in educational-therapeutic centers of Rasht city in 2011. The data collection tool was consisted of Braden scale. Data was analyzed using T test, Chi square, Fisher test and logistic regression.
Results: From 350 patients studied, 221 were male and 129 were female. The mean age was 49.77±20.54. Incidence of pressure ulcer in this study was 22.6%. The most pressure ulcer cases were identified in ICUs patients. In logistic regression model, the chance of pressure ulcer formation in Braden scale in "limited sense of understanding” versus "lack of sense disorder" was significant [OR=3.59, (CI: 1.57-8.20)]. The probability of pressure ulcer formation in completely motionless sub group versus lack of limitation in motility was significant [OR= 19.97, (CI: 1.81-219.81)]. The probability of formation of pressure ulcer in problem sub group in friction versus lack of problem in friction was significant with [OR=6.51, (CI: 1.12-37.87)].
Conclusion: The findings of study showed that Braden's instrument is proper and standard measurement in determining at risk patients for pressure ulcer. The use of this instrument for evaluating patients and attending effective factors of pressure ulcer development before hospitalization can identify patients at risk and decrease the incidence of pressure ulcer.

