ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: One third of hemophilia cases occur without family history due to spontaneous gene mutation and it could cause a delay in diagnosis at birth. Since fingerprint is a unique identifier to an individual, the aim of this study was to compare the fingerprint of hemophilic patients and normal population.
METHODS: This case control study was conducted on 62 hemophilia patients who had referred to the Arak Hemophilia Center (case group) and 62 normal persons (control group). The type of fingerprint of each finger was determined by an expert forensic scientist using advanced Henry method. According to this method, the fingerprint types are classified to arch, loop, whorl and others and the two groups were compared.
FINDINGS: The loop type was the commonest fingerprint in control group (65%) and the whorl type was the most common type in hemophilic patients (34%) (p <  0.001). In all fingers, the average number of loop type was significantly higher in control group than other group (6.5±2.6 vs. 2.9±1.6, p < 0.001, respectively) and the average number of whorl and other types (rare or unknown) was significantly lower in control group than hemophilic patients (whorl: 2.3±2.5 vs. 3.4±2.1, p=0.010, respectively; other types: 0.6±1 vs. 3.3±2.4, p < 0.001, respectively). There were significant differences of fingerprints of each finger between two groups, too. In addition, the average number of arch fingerprint in hemophilic patients with mild level of disease was significantly lower than patients with more severe disease (0.2±0.4 vs. 0.6±0.6), p < 0.001, respectively) while the average number of whorl type was greater in patients with mild disease than other group (5±1.2 vs. 1.8±1.6, p < 0.001, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Findings of this study show that the number of loop fingerprints in all fingers of hemophilic patients is lower and the numbers of whorl and unknown types in all fingers are higher than normal persons. So, it can be applicable as an easy, inexpensive and correct screening method for diagnosis of hemophilic patients particularly patients with spontaneous gene mutation. 

