This paper analyzes the impact of integrated watershed land use plans generated through multi-objective optimization techniques in a Central
Himalayan watershed on forest fodder dependency for meeting fodder requirements of livestock in the watershed. Alternate land use plans were
developed for optimizing four objective functions e maximizing farm income, employment and nutritional security, and minimizing soil loss
individually and simultaneously at the watershed level. The analysis was carried under two capital availability scenarios (restricted and unrestricted).
The values of cultivated land utilization index (CLUI), crop diversification index (CDI), cropping intensity (CI) and forest dependency
were estimated for each plan. Inferior plans were eliminated by applying the Law of Dominance rule. Out of the several optimal plans generated,
the best land use plan was selected by employing MODSS techniques. Annual fodder production, sustainable animal population and changes in
forest dependency were then computed.
Optimal plans suggested significant changes in the number of buffaloes and cows in the watershed and in land use. Under a restricted capital
availability scenario, forest dependency would change from existing surplus fodder availability to a dependency of 31.96% under the optimal
plan, while under unrestricted capital scenario, forest dependency would be about 29.6%.
This technique for land use planning to balance farmer and environmental needs has potential to prepare plans that will reduce current trends
of increased forest degradation in the Himalayas. Watershed development and forest management plans in the central middle Himalayan region
would therefore need to incorporate several measures to improve forest productivity, in situ moisture conservation and develop effective participatory
forest management plans. The complexity of sustainable watershed development in a highly heterogeneous landscape requires that such
optimal land use plans be developed for various identified micro-watersheds to meet location specific social and environmental requirements in
the Himalayan region.
