ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Bronchiolitis is a lower respiratory tract infection which is prevalent in children younger than 2 years. The use of chest radiography for diagnose of bronchiolitis is controversial. This study aimed at determining the radiological findings in children with bronchiolitis who were admitted to Amirkola children hospital and two radiologists consistency.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study was performed on 165 children with 2-24 months old admitted to Amirkola children hospital with bronchiolitis in 2011 and 2012. Inclusion criterion was the first episode of bronchiolitis. Bronchiolitis diagnosis was based on patient history and physical examination and presence of wheezing in the first 7 days of illness. Other data were recorded including age, sex, axillary temperature on admission to the emergency room, crackles and the score of Respiratory Distress Assessment Instrument (RDAI) for detection of severity of bronchiolitis. The scale had zero to 17 score that had a score of 5 or less as the mild bronchiolitis and 6 or more were considered as severe bronchiolitis. Chest radiography in posterior-anterior position was done in all patients and it was reviewed by two radiologists. 
FINDINGS: Of 165 patients, 69 (41.8%) were female. The mean age of children was 7.3±5.6 months. Sixty-six (40%) of children had Crackles. 74.5% of the subjects were taking antibiotics during hospitalizations. 19.4% were treated as outpatients and 80.6% of children were hospitalized. The mean and standard deviation of RDAI score of children with bronchiolitis was 6.7±2.8 and 51.5% had severe bronchiolitis. Ninety eight children had increased pulmonary markers and peribronchial infiltration and 56 children had complex findings in both radiologists' reports. In 93.3% of cases the findings reported by two radiologists were the same.
CONCLUSION: Results showed that radiography was not necessary in children with acute bronchiolitis and these findings were compatible with clinical diagnosis.

