ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Considering the increasing of fungal infections, including Aspergillosis and with the development of fungal drug resistance, many researchers focus on the antifungal properties of plant essences. The aim of this study was to evaluate the inhibition and destruction effects of Cuminum cyminum, Ziziphora clinopodioides and Nigella sativa essences on aspergillus cells.
METHODS: In this experimental study, the first group was included of each one of the Cuminum cyminum, Ziziphora clinopodioides and Nigella sativa essences as case group, and the second group of the study was included of positive and negative control group. The essences were extracted by hydro-distillation procedure. Then, by applying Broth Macro Dilution and Broth Micro Dilution techniques and four times of repetitions, the mean of Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC90) and Minimum Fungicidal Concentration (MFC) of the above-mentioned essences were certified against Aspergillus fumigatus (ATCC 16913) and Aspergillus parasiticus (ATCC 115201) in Broth Macro Dilution and Broth Micro Dilution techniques, in 0.25, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3 and 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.25, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 8 concentrations (mg/mlit), respectively. Analysis of chemical compositions of the essences was performed by using gas chromatography linked to mass spectrometer (Gc/Ms). The effects of above-mentioned essences on cellular structure of aspergillus species were examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM).  
FINDINGS: Based on broth macro dilution technique and 4 times of repetitions, the mean of MIC90 and MFC of Cuminum cyminum, Ziziphora clinopodioides, and Nigella sativa essences on both of aspergillus species, were 0.31, 0.40, 1.50 mg/ml, and 0.75, 1.28, 2.25 mg/ml, respectively. The same arrangement of the above-mentioned essences effect was also confirmed by broth micro dilution technique. The statistical tests showed a significant correlation between inhibition and destruction effects of essences used in this study (p=0.017). Considering the analysis, the main constituent of C. cyminum oil was ?- pinene (30%), in Z. clinopodioides oil was pulegone (37%), and in N. sativa oil it was transanethole (38.9%). The main pathologic changes were observed by TEM were in the cell wall, plasma membrane and membranous organelles.
CONCLUSION: The findings of this study showed that Cminum cyminum, Ziziphora clinopodioides and Nigella sativa had appropriate fungistatical and fungicidal functions against Aspergillus fumigatus and Aspergillus parasiticus.

