The potential impact of an increase in solar ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation due to human activity on higher plants has been the subject of many studies. Little work has been carried out so far on cotton responses to enhanced UV-B radiation. The objective of this study was to determine whether or not the current and projected increases in UV-B levels affect cotton growth and development, and to quantify and develop UV-B radiation functional algorithms that can be used in simulation models. Two experiments were conducted during the summer of 2001 using sunlit plant growth chambers in a wide range of UV-B radiations under optimal growing conditions. Leaves exposed to UV-B radiation developed chlorotic and necrotic patches depending on the intensity and length of exposure. Along with changes in visible morphology, cotton canopy photosynthesis declined with increased UV-B radiation. The decline in canopy photosynthesis was partly due to loss of photosynthetic pigments and UV-B-induced decay of leaf-level photosynthetic efficiency (maximum photosynthesis) and capacity (quantum yield) as the leaves aged. The total leaf area was less due to smaller leaves and fewer leaves per plant. Less plant height was closely related to a shorter average internode length rather than a fewer mainstem nodes. The UV-B did not affect cotton major developmental events such as time taken to square, time to flower, and leaf addition rates on the mainstem. Lower biomass was closely related to both smaller leaf area and lower photosynthesis. The critical limit, defined as 90% of optimum or the control, for stem elongation was lower (8.7 kJ m−2 per day UV-B) than the critical limit for leaf expansion (11.2 kJ m−2 per day UV-B), indicating that stem elongation was more sensitive to UV-B than leaf expansion. The critical limits for canopy photosynthesis and total dry weight were 7 and 7.3 kJ m−2 per day, respectively. The identified UV-B-specific indices for stem and leaf growth and photosynthesis parameters may be incorporated into cotton simulation models such as GOSSYM to predict yields under present and future climatic conditions.
