Most satellites provide, at best, a single daily snapshot of vegetation and, at worst, these snapshots may be separated by periods of many days when the ground was obscured by cloud cover. Since vegetation carbon exchange can be very dynamic on diurnal and day-to-day timescales, the limited temporal resolution of satellite data is a potential limitation in the use of these data to estimate integrated CO2 exchange between vegetation and the atmosphere. Our objective in this study was to determine whether consistent relationships exist between midday carbon flux on clear days and daily or 8-day mean values. CO2 flux data were obtained from eight sites, covering a wide range of vegetation types, which are part of the AmeriFlux system. Midday gross CO2 exchange was highly correlated with both daily and 8-day mean gross CO2 exchange and these relationships were consistent across all the vegetation types. In addition, it did not make any difference whether the midday data were derived from the AM or PM satellite overpass times, indicating that midday depression of photosynthesis was not a significant factor in these relationships. Inclusion of cloudy days in the 8-day means also did not affect the relationships relative to single clear days. Although there was a relationship between photosynthetic rates and photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) for half hour data, this relationship tended to saturate at PAR values less than half of full sun and for many of the sites the relationship between daily total photosynthesis and PAR was very weak. Consequently, cloudy conditions had less effect on daily gross CO2 exchange than would have been expected. Conversely, the saturation of photosynthesis at moderate PAR values resulted in considerable variation in light use efficiency (LUE). LUE was higher for daily and 8-day means than it was at midday on clear days and the correlation between midday and 8-day mean LUE was relatively weak. Although these results suggest that it may not be possible to estimate 8-day mean LUE reliably from satellite data, LUE models may still be useful for estimation of midday values of gross CO2 exchange which could then be related to longer term means of CO2 exchange.
