A large number of slabs (floor and roof) in industrial and residential buildings were constructed by steel I-beam, brick Jack arch slab in Iran. Jack arch masonry flooring system consists of a number of closely-spaced, parallel steel I-beams and a number of shallow brick arches filling the spaces between the steel beams. The spaces over the arches are then filled to create a flat floor. This kind of slab did not indicate suitable reaction during past earthquakes. Collapse of a large number of these non-homogeneous one-way slabs during past earthquakes has highlighted their poor seismic performance. They do not behave as rigid elements. However, due to their easy construction together with low cost, the jack-arch slab is still widely used in many countries. Thus it is necessary to study the rigidity of this kind of slabs by more accuracy. The objective of this paper is to evaluate the rigidity of the jack arch slab and influence of X-shaped bars and top layer concrete in their rigidity using nonlinear analysis (Ansys software). Finite element numerical analyses are then conducted to investigate the effects of a number of parameters on the rigidity of the slabs. In addition, appropriate tables and figures are presented to facilitate the investigation of the jack arch slabs. For this purpose, several steel-framed structures constructed by jack arch slab with different terms were selected. These terms consist of, number of buildings stories (one, two and three stories), diameter of bars (14, 16, 18 and 20 mm), thickness of top layer concrete (6, 8 and 10 cm) and different areas of slabs (3.6×3.6, 3.6×4.5, 3.6×5.4 and 3.6×6.3 m). To consider the rigidity of slabs, the 2800 standard's regulations were applied. According to the rules and regulations of standard no. 2800, the slab will be rigid if the ratio of relative story displacement and diaphragm displacement to be less than 0.5 and the slab will be flexible, if this ratio to be greater than 0.5. The result of an experimental model was used to clarify the result of this research. It was shown that the result of experimental model was in conformity with this research one. At the end two expressions was suggested for determination of bars diameters and the concrete layer's thickness needed for rigidity of jack arch slab.
