The separated turbulent flow past an inclined flat plate with sharp leading and trailing edges was computed based on three different simulation approaches for a reynolds number Rec= 20000 and a high angle of attack (alpha) = 18°. The simulation techniques applied were the Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations combined with a one-equation SpalartAllmaras turbulence model, the large-eddy simulation (LES) based on an algebraic eddy-viscosity model, and a hybrid approach known as detached-eddy simulation (DES) applying a slightly modified Spalart-Allmaras model in the entire integration domain. DES is a non-zonal coupling technique of RANS and LES developed in the hope of reducing the large computational resources required for LES computations of turbulent flows with practical relevance. However, the objective of the present study was not to compare the resources (CPU time, memory) required for all three techniques but to investigate and evaluate the quality of the predicted results for RANS, DES and LES. For this purpose, a test case which is favourable to the basic concept of DES and which places special emphasis on the LES part of the DES concept was chosen. This last issue was important since the modified Spalart-Allmaras model applied as a subgrid scale model in the LES part is not as well validated as other models usually applied in LES. For this purpose, an LES prediction on a very fine grid served as a reference case for the evaluation. For all three techniques, predictions with different grid resolutions were carried out and compared with each other based on important integral parameters (e.g. Strouhal number, mean drag and lift coefficients and their standard deviations), the instantaneous and time-averaged flow structures, and higher-order statistics. As expected, the pure RANS calculation, although applied as unsteady RANS, failed to predict the unsteady characteristics of the separated flow. In contrast, the DES approach yielded reasonably the shedding phenomenon and some integral parameters. However, analysing the results in more detail led to remarkable deviations between the DES and LES predictions also when the same grid resolution was applied. Especially the free shear layer originating from the leading edge of the plate was not well reproduced by DES, showing strong deficiencies of the model applied as a subgrid scale model. The reasons for this behaviour of the model were analysed in detail. Two basic causes were identified; the first is given by some near-wall corrections in the finite Reynolds number version of the model which are not working properly in the LES mode of DES. The second is a modified definition of the filter width typically applied for DES, leading to strongly increased values of the eddy viscosity. A revised version of the S-A model taking both issues seriously into account was used as a subgrid scale model in the LES mode. As a direct consequence, much better agreement with the reference LES solution was found for the DES prediction on the coarse grid, eliminating the deficiencies of the original formulation.
