Intracellular thiols are essential biomolecules, which play several critical roles in living organisms including controlling intracellular redox potential and acting as cofactors for several vital detoxification enzymes including S-transferases and formaldehyde dehydrogenases. The tripeptide γ-l-glutamyl-l-cysteinylglycine, more commonly known as glutathione, is well known as the major intracellular thiol in eukaryotes and in some bacteria. However, glutathione is absent in the Actinomycetales bacteria such as Mycobacteria and Streptomyces and is believed to be replaced by 1-d-myo-inosityl-2-(N-acetyl-l-cysteinyl)amido-2-deoxy-α-d-glucopyranoside, mycothiol, in these organisms. Although much is known about the chemistry and biochemistry of glutathione, currently much less is known concerning mycothiol and its properties. The structure of mycothiol is composed of a glycoside linkage between myo-inositol and d-glucosamine with an N-acetyl-l-cysteine linked to the 2′-amino group of the d-glucosamine moiety. Mycothiol is currently of intense interest due to its essential role in the cellular physiology of Mycobacteria, such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and its possible role in antimycobacterial drug resistance. A detailed investigation of its chemistry is therefore essential in ameliorating our knowledge of this key glycothiol, and in shedding additional light on its biochemical role in these pathogenic organisms. This report presents a detailed conformational analysis of mycothiol utilizing a variety of force fields and stochastic search protocols. Cluster analyses of energetically low lying conformations have indicated the presence of several key conformations that are populated in the gas phase and with implicit water solvation. These conformations are compared to recent NMR studies on a derivative of mycothiol. This information should be an important contribution to our basic understanding of the chemistry of this glycothiol and critical in the design of novel inhibitors of pathogen enzymes that require it.
