One of the most important problems that always have been considered by the authorities in the crisis management is the selection of site for emergency and temporary sheltering. It is obvious that inappropriate site selection may lead to another disaster that is more complex than the main one. So, the necessity of planning, managing and offering appropriate options for temporary sheltering of affected people before the occurrence of earthquake is vital. The objective of this research is the presentation of the appropriate and efficient method for the selection of site for temporary sheltering using Fuzzy algorithms. For illustrating the efficiency of proposed algorithm, the municipality district no.1 of Tehran is selected as the case study. Using the results of damage assessment of the study area, the number of homeless people was evaluated 136786 people and the required shelter was evaluated 410-615 hectares.  For the selection of site, initially necessary criteria are determined. After studying the past research and receiving the expert’s viewpoints, 13 criteria were selected. These criteria include criteria such as vicinity to water resources, distance from faults and rivers, vicinity to hospitals and other therapeutic centers, and security. In this research, Fuzzy and Boolean logics have been used for the combination of the criteria (layers). IDRISI is used for the implementation of fuzzy operations and the selection of site for temporary sheltering due to its high capability in the multi criteria decision making analysis problems. Then using WLC (Weighted Linear Combination) method, the produced fuzzy layers (maps) were combined and the map of eligibility was produced. Using this map and Fuzzy logic, 17 zones with total area of 649.1 hectares were selected for temporary sheltering. The results indicated that due to applied decisive limitations in Boolean method (classic method), the number of selected sites are more than Fuzzy method. Boolean logic is not appropriate for the areas that land use has some limitations. Assessment of applied fuzzy method in this research (WLC) showed that despite the simplicity of WLC method, it has high efficiency and makes possibility of allocating different weights to various criteria due to the importance of criteria. Considering this predominance; the outcomes of the selection of site using WLC fuzzy method have better resolution power. However results showed that the selection of site depends on the experience and personal judgment of the corresponding manager, therefore fuzzy logic has high efficiency.
