The objective of this study was to investigate seasonal changes of semen quality parameters in Franches–Montagnes stallions and to compare the freezability of ejaculates collected in autumn and winter. Experiments were performed using 15 stallions from the National Stud Farm in Avenches (Switzerland). Ejaculates were collected and evaluated every month during 1 year as well as cryopreserved in autumn and winter (September to February). In fresh semen the gel-free volume, concentration, motility and morphology (normal sperm, major defects, vacuoles and acrosome defects) were evaluated and in frozen-thawed semen the motility as well as the viability (SYBR-14/PI) were performed. To analyse seasonal differences four periods of 3 months each were defined as autumn (September, October, November), winter (December, January, February), spring (March, April, May) and summer (June, July, August). During the 1-year experiment all fresh semen quality parameters demonstrated a clear seasonal and individual pattern. The gel-free volume was significantly (P<0.05) higher in spring and summer compared to autumn and winter while sperm concentration was significantly (P<0.05) lower in spring than at any other time of the year. Total sperm number was significantly (P<0.05) higher and sperm motility significantly (P<0.05) lower in summer than in other seasons. Regarding sperm morphology, normal sperm was significantly (P<0.05) higher in autumn than in winter and summer and major defects were lowest (P<0.05) in autumn. In frozen-thawed semen motility was significantly (P<0.05) improved in the ejaculates collected in autumn compared to winter, while viability showed no obvious differences. Our results clearly demonstrate that individual and seasonal differences occurred in semen quality of Franches–Montagnes stallions. Ejaculates collected in autumn (September, October, November) demonstrated good quality, especially regarding sperm morphology, and were more suitable for cryopreservation because of better motility in frozenthawed semen collected during autumn than in winter.
