Regarding the importance of rural development in the national development process of Iran in recent years, different approaches and methods have been taken into consideration in order to achieve rural development goals, among which the most important is Rural Guide Plans (RGP’s). Despite the primary objectives and programs set to achieve rural development, it seems that the preparing and implementing of the plans have encountered numerous difficulties of various dimensions which tend to reduce the effectiveness and efficiency of RGP’s. Thus, the main question of the survey was to identify difficulties involved in implementing RGP’s in rural areas. In this respect, the main objective of the research was to analyze the difficulties of implementing RGP’s in the villages of Zanjan County. The methodology used was non-experimental in terms of controllability degree of the variables, and field research in terms of method of data collection. The statistical population covered by the study contained all heads of rural households in the villages having more than 100 households in Zanjan County where the plan had been implemented and completed by the end of 2010 (N=8748). According to the Krejcie and Morgan table, a sample size of 370 was selected using a stratified random sampling (n=370). A questionnaire was used to collect the data. The content validity of the questionnaire was confirmed by a panel of experts. A pilot study was conducted to establish the reliability of the research instrument. The Cronbach’s Alpha coefficients for the main scales of the questionnaire were higher than 0.75. The data were analyzed using SPSSwin19 and LISREL8.5 softwares. The exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis were used in order to identify factors related to difficulties of implementing RGP’s in the study area, and examine the goodness fit index of the research model, respectively. The results of the exploratory factor analysis showed that five factors, namely, managerial- planning, environmental, physical, cognitive- informative and technical explained 67.73 percent of total variances of the difficulties of implementing RGP’s in the villages of the Zanjan County. Based on the findings of the confirmatory factor analysis, the mentioned factors sufficiently measure independent and separate dimensions of the difficulties involved in implementing RGP’s. The findings of this study can increase the effectiveness and efficiency of RGP’s through contributing to a better understanding of the plans and providing some practical strategies and suggestions for solving the difficulties of implementing RGP’s in the study area. 
