Peter Latz is a German landscape
architect who is best known for his emphasis
on reclamation and conversion of former industrialized
landscapes and replacing the contaminated
industrial sites with a place for recreation
with special aesthetics. He tries to keep the
main structures and to incorporate them into a
postmodern landscape design for creating an
innovative space for the users while preserving
the memories and signs, structures and sites
in the city.
Latz has showcased his ideas in conversion
of a contaminated site to a recreation space
in 1980 by designing the Saarbrücken harbor
which was a coal mine in the past. In this project,
which considered as his first experience,
an obvious track of classic aesthetics can be
seen that diminishes thoroughly in his other
projects such as Parco Dora in Torino, Italy. He
has been successful in making a low quality
and contaminated industrial site to a city park
without cleaning the industrial remanant.
He claims that considering the structure is
the key element in his projects. He also considers
himself a structuralist landscape architect.
This point of view that has offered a special
term of aesthetics in landscape architecture is
a resulted matter in structuralism philosophies
theorized by Klaude Levi Strauss and Ferdinand
de Saussure. This paper tries to find out
the structuralist theories and his points of view
behind the projects of “Saarbrücken” harbor
and “Dora” Park.
In the reclamation of former industrialized
landscapes, the site can be ruined and a new
landscape with the classic principals can be
implied that is generally accepted. In a case
where we consider landscape design a process
started by subjective matters, it will lead
to objective and formal terms. Ignoring the real
value of a place or person and designing based
on constant principals will not be valuable especially
in structuralism where the user is the
most important element of design. Peter Latz
has created a new style in the reclamation of
former industrialized landscapes that embodies
the relationship of the site and city structure
as well as creating a unique space with
various and attracting functions. His treatment
of post-industrial landscapes seems to accept
the formal and aesthetic nature of the existing,
which derived from his ideas in structuralism.
His approach has been significant from the beginning
of his first experiences and it has been
developing since his last projects.
