The objective of this paper was to study the effect of plasticizers and their concentrations on the thermal and functional properties of gelatin-based films. Four polyols (glycerol—GLY, propylene glycol—PPG, di- DTG and ethylene glycol—ETG) were tested in five concentrations: 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30 g plasticizer/100 g of gelatin. For thermal analysis, the films were conditioned in desiccators with silica gel and for functional properties (mechanical properties, water vapor permeability, color and opacity) characterizations, the films were conditioned at 25 °C and 58% relative humidity. The results were discussed in terms of ‘plasticizer efficiency’ meaning plasticizer content effect and also in terms of ‘plasticizer effect’ meaning the plasticizer type effect on the properties. In a general manner, the higher plasticizing effect on thermal properties was observed with the DTG, followed by PPG, GLY and ETG, principally with low plasticizer content. However, also in terms of thermal properties, the ETG presented the higher plasticizer efficiency followed by the GLY, DTG and PPG. Concerning the mechanical properties, the GLY showed the greater plasticizing effect and efficiency, but the plasticizing efficiency of DTG on the puncture deformation was also considerable. The mechanical resistance could be related with the glass transition temperature of films. It was not possible to observe the plasticizer effect on the water vapor permeability (WVP), but the DTG had shown greater plasticizer efficiency, followed by GLY and ETG, while a counter effect was observed with PPG. The effect of the type and concentration of plasticizer on the color and opacity of films could be considered as negligible. In conclusion, the more important plasticizer effect and efficiency were observed with DTG and ETG on the thermal properties, and with the GLY in terms of functional properties. The behavior of the mechanical properties of films could be explained by its glass transition temperature.
