Considerable attention has been devoted to contaminants (mainly PCBs and mercury) in subsistence foods (particularly fish)
from various parts of the world. However, relatively little attention has been devoted to examining mercury levels in a full range of
subsistence foods from a particular region. While managers and scientists compute risk based on site-specific data on contaminant
levels and consumption rates, a first step in making risk decisions by subsistence peoples is knowledge about the relative levels of
mercury in the foods they eat. This study examined levels of mercury in subsistence foods (edible components) from several
islands in the western Aleutians of Alaska, including algae (4 species), invertebrates (9 species), fish (15 species) and birds (5
species). Samples were gathered by both subsistence hunters/fishers and by scientists using the same equipment. Another objective
was to determine if there were differences in mercury levels in subsistence foods gathered from different Aleutian islands. We
tested the null hypotheses that there were no interspecific and interisland differences in mercury levels. Because of variation in
distribution and the nature of subsistence hunting and fishing, not all organisms were collected from each of the islands. There were
significant and important differences in mercury levels among species, but the locational differences were rather small. There was
an order of magnitude difference between algae/some invertebrates and fish/birds. Even within fish, there were significant
differences. The highest mean mercury levels were in flathead sole (Hippoglossoides elassodon, 0.277 ppm), yellow irish lord
(Hemilepidotus jardani, 0.281 ppm), great sculpin (Myoxocephalus polyacanthocephalus, 0.366 ppm), glaucous-winged gull
(Larus glaucescens, 0.329 ppm) and its eggs (0.364 ppm), and pigeon guillemot (Cepphus columba, 0.494 ppm). Mercury levels
increased with increasing weight of the organisms for limpets (Tectura scutum), and for 11 of the 15 fish species examined. Nine of
the 15 fish species had some samples over the 0.3 ppm level, and 7 of 15 fish had some samples over 0.5 ppm. For birds, 95% of
the pigeon guillemot muscle samples were above the 0.3 ppm, and 43% were above 0.5 ppm. While health professionals may argue
about the risk and benefits of eating fish, and of eating alternative protein sources, the public should be provided with enough information for them to make informed decisions. This is particularly true for subsistence people who consume large quantities of
self-caught foods, particularly for sensitive sub-populations, such as pregnant women. We argue that rather than giving people
blanket statements about the health benefits or risks from eating fish, information on mean and maximum mercury levels should
also be provided on a wide range of subsistence foods, allowing informed decisions, especially by those most at risk.
