Accurate pollutant mass budgets are needed for identifying contaminant sources and establishing cleanup goals.
We monitored mercury discharges from an abandoned mine site in northern California with the objectives of:  1.
estimating the mass loading of mercury from the site;  2. evaluating the factors that control the mercury discharges;
 3. assessing the significance of peak flows in transporting contaminants; and  4. developing methods for measuring
the effectiveness of cleanup efforts. We sampled water downstream from the mine site over a wide range of
streamflows. Mercury concentrations varied over 2000-fold, from 485 to 1 040 000 ngrl, grossly exceeding the
regulatory water quality objective of 12 ngrl at all times. Particulate mercury represented over 99.97% of the total
mercury, and mercury concentrations were closely correlated to suspended sediment concentrations  rs0.98.. Thus,
we can use suspended sediment concentrations as a proxy for mercury concentrations, and calculate a continuous
record of mercury flux from continuous monitoring of streamflow  using a small flume. and turbidity  using an optical
backscatter sensor.. Mercury fluxes inferred in this way are consistent with fluxes estimated from field samples. In
January and February of 1998, our small abandoned mine site released approximately 82 kg of mercury to
downstream waters. Most of the mercury was released during brief intense rainstorms. For example, in one 200-min
period we recorded 3.4 cm of rain, a 2.6-fold increase in streamflow  460]1120 lrs., and an 82-fold increase in
mercury flux  1.2]99 grmin.. Over 75% of the total mercury flux during this 2-month period occurred in less than
10% of the total time. In systems such as this one, where contaminant transport is highly episodic, sampling programs
that miss the high-flow episodes may greatly underestimate the actual water quality threat. In addition, changes in
pollutant fluxes or concentrations in receiving waters may not reflect changes in pollutant sources  such as an
environmental cleanup. if the stochastic forcing  e.g. intense rainstorms. varies through time. We propose that water quality trends can be more accurately measured by changes in the relationship between contaminant flux and
stochastic driving factors, as expressed by contaminant rating curves.
