PCBs and other persistent organochlorine ŽOC. pesticides were analyzed in sediment cores collected from six lakes
in Yukon Territory and one in northern British Columbia, Canada, with the objective of establishing sources and
historical trends of these contaminants. DDT was found to be the most prominent OC in the sediment profiles of
most of the lakes. Maximum  DDT levels Ž3.47 2680 ng g 1 dw. were observed in sediment slices dated to the
1950s from lakes near populated areas. In contrast, in more remote lakes ŽHanson, Kusawa and Lindeman., the
maximum  DDT concentrations were observed in the sediments dated to the 1970s. Highest  PCB and  DDT
concentrations were measured in sediments from Watson Lake, near a suspected PCB waste disposal site and in a
region where DDT was heavily applied in the 1950s and 1960s. Elevated  PCB concentrations  16.1 93.6 ng g 1 dry
weight Ždw.  were also observed in sediments from lakes situated near populated areas, relative to Kusawa and
Lindeman Ž11.1 and 12.7 ng g 1 dw, respectively.. Recent  PCB fluxes ranged from 621 ng m 2 y 1 in Kusawa
Lake to 16 400 ng m 2 y 1 in Little Atlin Lake. The extremely high sedimentation rate Ž2050 g m 2 y 1. in glacial
fed Lindeman Lake gave rise to elevated fluxes of  PCB Ž2410 ng m 2 y 1. and other OCs, despite much lower
concentrations in the sediment. Levels of hexachlorocyclohexanes Ž HCH., chlordane-related compounds Ž CHL.,
and chlorobenzenes Ž CBz. were in the low ng g 1 Ždw. range in all lake sediments, similar to concentrations
previously reported for Arctic lakes in Canada, indicating that their major source was long range atmospheric  transport. Contamination of the lakes with PCBs and DDT near populated areas of the Yukon Territory appears to
be a result of regional activities rather than long range transport and deposition. The results also point to glacial
runoff as a significant source of OCs to small, high elevation lakes ŽLindeman., but not to larger lakes within the
Yukon River drainage basin that are also affected by glacial sources ŽKusawa, Laberge..
