Vulnerability assessment to delineate areas that are more susceptible to contamination from anthropogenic sources has
become an important element for sensible resource management and land use planning. This contribution aims at estimating
aquifer vulnerability by applying the DRASTIC model as well as utilizing sensitivity analyses to evaluate the relative
importance of the model parameters for aquifer vulnerability in Kakamigahara Heights, Gifu Prefecture central Japan. An
additional objective is to demonstrate the combined use of the DRASTIC and geographical information system (GIS) as an
effective method for groundwater pollution risk assessment. The DRASTIC model uses seven environmental parameters (Depth
to water, net Recharge, Aquifer media, Soil media, Topography, Impact of vadose zone, and hydraulic Conductivity) to
characterize the hydrogeological setting and evaluate aquifer vulnerability. The western part of the Kakamigahara aquifer was
dominated by bHighQ vulnerability classes while the eastern part was characterized by bModerateQ vulnerability classes. The
elevated north-eastern part of the study area displayed bLowQ aquifer vulnerability. The integrated vulnerability map shows the
high risk imposed on the eastern part of the Kakamigahara aquifer due to the high pollution potential of intensive vegetable
cultivation. The more vulnerable western part of the aquifer is, however, under a lower contamination risk. In Kakamigahara
Heights, land use seems to be a better predictor of groundwater contamination by nitrate. Net recharge parameter inflicted the
largest impact on the intrinsic vulnerability of the aquifer followed by soil media, topography, vadose zone media, and hydraulic
conductivity. Sensitivity analyses indicated that the removal of net recharge, soil media and topography causes large variation in
vulnerability index. Moreover, net recharge and hydraulic conductivity were found to be more effective in assessing aquifer
vulnerability than assumed by the DRASTIC model. The GIS technique has provided efficient environment for analyses and
high capabilities of handling large spatial data.
