The emerging US carbon nano-manufacturing sector accounts for 40% of nanotechnology product marketplace, thus, there is a significant potential for increased risks arising from workers' exposure to carbon nanofibers (CNF). This research aims at developing a low-cost/evidence-based tool, thereby, increasing the sustainability of CNF manufacturing firms. The following specific aims achieve the study objective: Aim 1 — To present a technical discussion of the proposed concept for risk analysis and protection measures; Aim 2 — To describe the manufacturing process utilized for the CNF production; Aim 3 — To describe the hazards typically encountered in a CNF manufacturing facility; and, Aim 4 — To document the application of the proposed tool for risk analysis and intervention strategy development.

In this study, a four-step methodology was developed to protect worker health in the nano-manufacturing enterprise through the generation of improvement actions (i.e., suggested changes in the hazard/work environment characteristics and individual capabilities without specifying how changes are made) followed by interventions (i.e., workplace solutions which specify how changes are being implemented). The methodology was implemented in a CNF manufacturing enterprise in the Midwest of the US. The data collected were based on detailed observations and interviews with worker and management personnel.

A detailed flow process analysis was conducted for the nano-manufacturing operation. Eleven hazards were identified at the facility. Analysis indicated that the computed risk scores ranged from moderate (i.e., requiring one to start with incremental changes, then, explore substantial changes, if needed) to very high (i.e., substantial changes should be planned in the short term, followed by incremental changes). A detailed intervention plan was presented for the identified hazards on the basis of criteria of applicability, cost, benefit and feasibility. Management personnel were in agreement with the findings of the study.

In conclusion, a low-cost/evidence-based tool was developed and implemented to assess and manage the risks associated with exposure to CNF production in a manufacturing enterprise. Preliminary validation of the tool suggests that management personnel were in agreement with the study findings. Further application of the systematic methodology is warranted.
