The Mississippi Delta Management Systems Evaluation Area (MD-MSEA) project was established in 1994 in three small
watersheds (202 to 1497 ha) that drain into oxbow lakes (Beasley, Deep Hollow, and Thighman). The primary research objective
was to assess the implications of management practices on water quality. Monthly monitoring of herbicide concentrations in lake
water was conducted from 2000 to 2003. Water samples were analyzed for atrazine, cyanazine, fluometuron, metolachlor, and
atrazine metabolites. Herbicide concentrations observed in the lake water reflected cropping systems of the watershed, e.g., atrazine
and metolachlor concentrations were associated with the level of corn and sorghum production, whereas cyanazine and
fluometuron was associated with the level of glyphosate-sensitive cotton production. The dynamics of herbicide appearance and
dissipation in lake samples were strongly influenced by herbicide use, lake hydrology, rainfall pattern, and land management
practices. The highest maximum concentrations of atrazine (7.1 to 23.4 μg L−1) and metolachlor (0.7 to 14.9 μg L−1) were
observed in Thighman Lake where significant quantities of corn were grown. Introduction of s-metolachlor and use of glyphosateresistant
cotton coincided with reduced concentration of metolachlor in lake water. Cyanazine was observed in two lakes with the
highest levels (1.6 to 5.5 μg L−1) in 2000 and lower concentrations in 2001 and 2002 (b0.4 μg L−1). Reduced concentrations of
fluometuron in Beasley Lake were associated with greater use of glyphosate-resistant cotton and correspondingly less need for soilapplied
fluometuron herbicide. In contrast, increased levels of fluometuron were observed in lake water after Deep Hollow was
converted from conservation tillage to conventional tillage, presumably due to greater runoff associated with conventional tillage.
These studies indicate that herbicide concentrations observed in these three watersheds were related to crop and soil management
practices.
