Constructed wetlands (CWs) in the agricultural landscape reduce non-point source pollution
through removal of nutrients and particles. The objective of this study was to evaluate if
measurements of natural abundance of 15NO3 − can be used to determine the fate of NO3 − in
different types of small CWs treating agricultural runoff. Nitrogen removal was studied in
wetland trenches filled with different filter materials (T1 — sand and gravel; T3 — mixture of
peat, shell sand and light-weight aggregates; T8 — barley straw) and a trench formed as a
shallow pond (T4). The removal was highest during summer and lowest during autumn and
winter. Trench T8 had the highest N removal during summer. Measurements of the natural
abundance of 15NinNO3 − showed that denitrificationwas not significant during autumn/winter,
while it was present in all trenches during summer, but only important for nitrogen removal in
trench T8. The 15N enrichment factors of NO3 − in this study ranged from−2.5 to −5.9‰(T3 and
T8, summer), thus smaller than enrichment factors found in laboratory tests of isotope
discrimination in denitrification, but similar to factors found for denitrification in groundwater
and a large CW. The low enrichment factors compared to laboratory studies was attributed to
assimilation in plants/microbes as well as diffusion effect. Based on a modified version of the
method presented by Lund et al. [Lund LJ, Horne AJ, Williams AE, Estimating denitrification in a
large constructed wetland using stable nitrogen isotope ratios. Ecol Engineer 2000; 14: 67–76],
denitrification and assimilation were estimated to account for 53 to 99 and 1 to 47%,
respectively, of the total N removal during summer. This method is, however, based on a
number of assumptions, and there is thus a need for a better knowledge of the effect of plant
uptake, microbial assimilation as well as nitrification on N isotopic fractionation before this
method can be used to evaluate the contribution of dinitrification in CWs.
