Background and Aim: It is obvious due to lack of resources, we should devote our limited resources to priorities in order to reach an acceptable level of health. The objective of this study is research priority setting for Pediatric Surgery Research Center with the participation of all stakeholders.
Materials and Methods: This is a Health System Research (HSR) project. In order to apply governance and leadership issues with the participation of 41 people including faculty members in Pediatric Surgery Research Center of Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, other pediatric specialists and health system stakeholders and the people associated with the health system inside and outside of the university. This study was performed with little change in 2010 using the Council on Health Research for Development (COHRED) model. Based on the model, at first the stakeholders were identified and the field situation of pediatric surgery was analyzed. Then, research areas and titles were specified and research priorities were setup by giving scores according to the criteria.
Results: The seven obtained research areas in order of priority are pediatric trauma, pediatric cancers, pediatric urology diseases, undescended testicles in children, developmental genetics and congenital defects, emergency in children and application of laparoscopic surgery in children. Because each of the research areas are composed of multiple subareas. Finally we specified 43 research subareas as research priorities. These subareas include epidemiology, risk factors, prevention, screening, diagnosis, treatment, follow-up, complications, knowledge and attitudes of parents, quality of life, economy aspects and data bank for further research. 
‍Conclusion: In this project, research priorities were setup for Pediatric Surgery Research Center of Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences with the participation of all the stakeholders based on the recommended model of WHO (COHRED). It seems that reliability of the priorities is in moderate level, but there is a certain validity in obtaining the best content in terms of the study conditions.


