 Khaje Rashidedin Fazl Allah, the Iranian scholar and statesman, is the different illustration and at the same time the distinguished scientific and practical tradition of Iran during the time of Mongol. He thought the acceptance of the position in Ilkhani cabinet would be an opportunity for the revitalization of knowledge and science in Iranian society. The ingenuity and intelligence he showed for the amendment of crisis stricken society of Iran made him the symbol of Iranian resistance against Mongol sovereignty. One of the famous works of this intelligent scientist and statesman which is the most important cultural masterpiece of Iranian history, is planning and foundation of Rashidi county with the capital of Dar-ol Elm Rabe Rashidi in east of Tabriz Dar-ol-Saltaneh. According to the explicit endowment of Rabe Rashidi, this county was founded for the support of science and scientist and all its fundaments including the center, oases and gardens in its environment were all acting to meet such objective. One of the oases located in the green periphery of this county was Fath Abad village. Based on historical documents, its development plan from the beginning of its formation owes to the opinion and effective intervention of Khaje Rashidedin Fazl Allah himself. In order to investigate the ancestry of a village in Iran, Fath Abad has the specialty of having credible information in the reliable sources to be searched about its early development.  The present research has been carried out according to this information and based on historical-descriptive method. This research discusses about the physical background of Fath Abad village and in the meantime makes it clear that the plan of the village while following the rural development traditions of that time in Iran has some special characteristics which distinguish it from other Iranian villages. These characteristics were sourcing from two main factors: First, substantial dependence and connection of this village with Dar-ol Elm Rabe Rashidi and second, special measurements which were taken by Khaje Rashidedin for its implementation and termination. The present article is also helpful for recognition of the position and planning of Khaje Rashidedin Fazl Allah.
