Background & Objective: Several factors play an integral role in the quality of higher education and improving its processes. Professional role modeling is one of the most determining factors in achieving educational goals and fostering better learning. Hence, the aim of this study was to investigate the scientific characteristics of positive and negative role models among medical educators from the viewpoint of the dentistry and pharmacy students in Kerman University of Medical Sciences (Kerman, Iran). 

Methods: In this descriptive, analytical, cross-sectional study, a structured and self-administered questionnaire was completed by 94 senior pharmacy and dentistry students. The questionnaire contained pre-specified items in 3 sections relating to the demographic characteristics of respondents and scientific characteristics of positive and negative role models. 

Results: The highest mean scores for positive role models were given to features as being respectful to colleagues (8.75), being knowledgeable (8.52), having teaching competencies (8.49), being good tempered (8.45) and being kind (8.43). There was not a statistically significant difference between the positive role models [age, gender, education level (basic-clinical)] and the scientific rank. The highest mean scores for negative role models were given to the features as deserving blame (-6.97), having no teaching competencies (-6.41), not being kind (-6.09), not being a good manager (-6.08) and not being respectful to students (-6.03). There was only a significant difference between the negative role models and scientific rank (P = 0.029). Totally, 2 positive and 3 negative characteristics were identified for professional and non-professional role models. These characteristics can be classified into ethical behavior and communication, educational and managerial skills, and scientific competencies. There was not a statistically significant difference regarding the association between the scientific characteristics of positive and negative role models and the general characteristics of the respondents in terms of age variable. 

Conclusion: Our results suggested that the positive and negative characteristics of teachers formed a significant part in their acceptance and choosing them as role models from the perspectives of students. To achieve the educational goals and improving our higher education system, special attention should be given to these aspects as personality, professionalism and scientific characteristics. 

