Background & Objective: Globalization is one of the most important topics in higher education today, which presents a powerful challenge and an opportunity for medical sciences university and healthcare provider. Nowadays, increasingly faced with healthcare challenges that require an understanding of global health trends and practices, yet little is known about what constitutes appropriate global health training. The main purpose of this research was to review the association between perception of globalization and information mastery and curriculum planning. 

Methods: This was a descriptive-analytical study on medical students. The study population consisted of 180 medical sciences students who were selected with random sampling methods. In order to measure attitudes of students towards globalization, measures were developed and used by researchers. For the purpose of evaluating of the validity of the measures, construct validity was utilized by factor analysis. In order to determine the reliability of the measures Cronbach's alpha was used, as well. 

Results: Findings indicated that the total respondents agreed or had positive approach towards globalization. Based on the results of the factor analysis, four factors i.e. personal and social attitude with 15 questions, sociopolitical attitude, and 7 question, two questions for performance and the fourth factor was the resource management concept of globalization which were identified with only one question in the questionnaire. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) results showed that there was no statistically significant association the students' perspective and demographic variables gender, school and age. 

Conclusion: The positive perception of globalization highlighted the needs of global health educational competencies and approaches used in medical schools and the need to facilitate greater consensus amongst medical educators and students on appropriate global health training for future health care providers. This process led to world integration, density of human awareness and world culture formation 

