The subjective steps of creativity process i.e. "insight", "preparation", "incubation", "intuition", and "verification"
based on Wallace Model was proposed after defining creation; They were discussed and suggested that these
steps cannot be taught. But the objective steps of creativity process i.e. "combination", "mutation", "analogy",
"first principle" (Another creative design method with similar potential has been added to the list, which is widely
accepted, is a useful objective model of creative design) and "emergence" in a form of an instructional and
designing practice were studied. The mutation, in which a novel concept emerges- perhaps quite suddenly- as
a potential design solution, is widely regarded as a characteristic feature of creative design. This paper is based
on an example of a Mutation which occurred during a recorded study of the activity of a small design team. The
characteristics and context of this Mutation are reconstructed from the recorded material. It is concluded that the
perceptual act underlying creative insight in design is more akin to bridging than leaping the gap between problem
and solution. Creative design as mutation involves modifying the form of some particular features, of an existing
design. Mutation procedure involves recognizing the existing constructive features and modifying them afterwards.
In this practice, mutation includes recognition of inefficiency of the last form of fabric cupola which is provided by
the student's adding glass at the ceiling. This is an important step in the formation of ideas.
In this practice, learning is examined at three steps: Active learning is the first which is a quick glance at the
obligations that are mainly acquired through examination of the samples of Iranian architecture and demonstration
of photos. The second is "Passive learning" in which the student progresses through making Knowledge Bridge
with the professor and is often guided through discussion and asking questions. The third step is "Reflective" in
which the novice offers his mental recognitions and implicit findings for the evaluation of the results of his work and
improvement of his skills.
The novice should get engaged in imitation in order to reflect the behavioral feedback of the instructor. The
instructors should also observe the reflective behavior of the novice. They must observe reflectively and improve or
add to their instruction until they make sure that the novice's behavior is convergent. The difference between the
skill of a novice and that of an expert is "a gap to be bridged by an intelligent effort". This paper is not attempting
to devalue the experience of working with a master, only to refocus where its value lies. The important point
concerning learning is one of access to practice as resource for learning, rather than instruction. And this access
to practice needs to include more than just access to master teacher. Involvement in a participatory support and
critique in the practice is necessary to enable students to evaluate and improve the quality of their work, Through
the whole paper, problem solving area is considered more significant in which the student is mostly discovering
than innovating.
Recognition of these developments can be useful in architecture education particularly in M.A. and Ph.D. courses
in universities, in addition to documentation of the contemporary architecture of Iran. On the other hands it will
establish the comprehensive and regular view to the architecture and alter the architectural activities to one part of
the contemporary architecture history with the public identity for people of the country too.
