Background and objective: Prevalence of overweight and obesity in Iranian adolescents is alarming. Due to numerous medical and psychosocial consequences of overweight and obesity in adolescents, educating and preventing of them is critical. The present study was conducted to determine the effectiveness of educational interventions to improve lifestyle associated with overweight and obesity among middle school students of Tonekabon city in 2012.
Material and Methods: In a quasi-experimental study, 120 middle school students were selected using multistage sampling methods and were divided equally into control and experimental groups. Demographic characteristics, behaviors that affect weight gain, weight Efficacy and Lifestyle were collected using valid and reliable self reporting questionnaire before and 6 months after educational intervention. Intervention consisted of four 60-minute sessions of group discussion along with displaying images and based on an initial assessment was designed and implemented. Finally, the data were analyzed using SPSS software version 18 and presented with independent and paired t-tests and chi-square.
Results: Behaviors that influence overweight and obesity related lifestyle include eating while standing, while watching TV, sleeping, between main meals, eat snacks when hungry, fast eating, watching TV and playing computer during free time at leisure were improved after educational intervention in experimental group (P <  0.05). Also, the psychological variables associated with self efficacy such as social pressure (from 8.6±3.0 to 13.04±2.3), positive emotions (from 7.2±2.8 to 10.7±3.3), negative emotions (from 12.6±4.4 to 16.2±5.1), physical discomfort (from 7.6±2.6 to 10.3±3.5)(P < 0.001) and food availability (from 11.3±5.2 to 15.6±5.0) (P < 0.05) were improved after education in experimental group.	
Conclusion: The educational program significantly improved the weight gain related behaviors and weight efficacy lifestyle in students. It is recommended educational programs run continuously and regularly in schools to prevent the adverse consequences of overweight and obesity.

