In process of sucrose determination in sugar beet, pulp analysis by polarometric method is done on the basis of fresh root weight .The volume of the juice of 26 grams of the pulp is considered 23 ml that with 177 ml of clarifying agent would be 200 ml. Drought stress and dehydrated root reduce. The volume of the pulp extract of 23 ml. The objective of this experiment was to determine the proper method for juice extraction from beet roots grown under drought, salinity and normal conditions in the procedure of sugar content measurement.  Sugar beet roots produced under various conditions were subjected to dehydration after harvest. Three levels of dehydration [(A) including fresh beet with 76±1 percent moisture (a1), dehydrated roots up to 70± 1 (a2) and 63± 1 (a3) percent water content] and three juice extraction methods [(traditional cold digestion (b1), hot digestion (b2) and improved French method (b3)] were arranged in a factorial experiment (3*3) in CRD with 12 replications.  Sugar content, dry matter, marc, brix and juice electrical conductivity were determined for all treatments. The results showed that beet dehydration from 76 to 68 percent increased both dry matter and marc contents from 24 to 32 and from 4.7 to 7.1 percent, respectively. In normal roots there was no significant difference in terms of sugar content determination by various extraction methods. However, sugar content of beet roots grown under semi-salinity (P < 0.05), salinity and drought (P < 0.01) conditions were affected significantly by extraction methods.  These differences are presumably due to differences in marc and dry matter contents. In conclusion, overall there was no difference between the hot digestion and French methods in all conditions.  Whereas, the difference of traditional methods with French method for dry matter of 24 to 27 percent was not significant. Thus, it is recommended to determine sugar content of beet roots having up to 27 percent dry matter by cold digestion method and in the beet roots of greater than 27 percent dry matter the proper way of juice extraction is French method.
