  Background & Objective: The main goal of university includes educating specialists needed for society, promotion and development of the knowledge, developing research, and providing the background for society development. Undoubtedly, professor is one of the main and effective factors in high education quality, and training specialist workers requires strong faculty members that are experienced and skilled in various educational courses. We decided to utilize two, professor and student, groups opinions about the indices of a good university teacher. 

  Methods: In this descriptive-analytic and cross-sectional research, 240 professors and 899 students of Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Iran, were selected by hierarchical and simple random sampling methods. The data were gathered by a researcher-made valid and reliable questionnaire. 

  Results: Teachers Characteristics for a good professor were respectively: Scholarships, communication skills, teaching skills, evaluation skills, and Physical characteristics and appearance of the teachers. Students Characteristics for a good professor, were respectively: communication skills, Scholarships, teaching skills, evaluation skills then Physical characteristics and appearance of the teachers. In the professors, ANOVA test showed there was a significant relationship between the work experience, rank and social field study of teachers and Priority communication skills, scholarship, teaching methods, evaluation and faculty characteristics (p  < 0.05). In the students, ANOVA test showed there was a significant relationship between major and semester students and Priority communication skills, scholarship and faculty characteristics(p < 0.05 ). 

  Conclusion: The comparability between two groups in teaching and evaluation domains indicates that there is a good relationship between them; though, this mutual relationship can facilitate learning, then increase students’ consent, and finally increscent educational quality. On the other hand. Giving high priority to professors’ personal characteristics and relationship skills by students shows that, students put more importance on mutual relationship as an educational background. 

