Kano state has distributed about 4,137,464 Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Net (LLINs) in 2009 being one of the main malaria vector control strategy developed by the Nigeria Federal Ministry of Health (FMOH) which is in line with Roll Back Malaria. The objective of the study was to evaluate the effectiveness of LLINs in use and to evaluate the knowledge, attitude and practice of some net users in Kano metropolis. The effectiveness of LLINs distributed in the year 2009 in Kano metropolis in Kano State, Northern Nigeria was evaluated using a cluster sample technique A Cone bioassay with laboratory reared Anopheles were performed. Knockdown after 60 minutes and mortality after 24 hours following 3 minutes exposure were evaluated. A total of 210 households were administered with two hundred and five (205) respondents 97.6% indicated the knowledge about LLINs while five (5) respondents were not aware. Similarly, one hundred and ninety- eight respondents (94.3%) strongly believed that the washing of LLINs does not reduce the preventive role of LLINs. Very high and consistent knockdown and mortality in all replicates was found. The outcome on the use of LLINs reflects the effective use of LLINs among the respondents with two hundred and eight respondents (99%). Respondent still holds some reservation on the use of LLINs, one hundred and five respondents (54.8%) believes it causes heat. It has been observed that the respondents reply does not rely mostly on LLINs despite by their believe in the efficacy of it rather, 41.4% of the people that participated in the research still resort to the use of spray and 26.2% uses smoke to prevent mosquito bite.  It can be concluded from the findings that respondents were fully aware of long lasting insecticide net and they agree that it is effective against the vector causing malaria parasite and other insects though some of them have reservation on the use of smoke and indoor residual spray to prevent mosquitoes bite. Considering that the nets are expected to be effective for three years or more years, it is reasonable to conclude that the nets were effective in preventing mosquito bites based on the knock-down and exposure mortality results. 
