In contrast to the well-documented seasonal variation in growth of below- and above-ground components of trees, the annual variation in below- and aboveground production is not well understood. In this study, we report on the monitoring of an unmanaged hardwood forest ecosystem in a small watershed of southern Quebec between 1993 and 1999. Below- and above-ground biomass production, leaf and soil solution chemistry, and air temperature were measured at different regular intervals and are reported on an annual basis. The objective of the study was to describe the annual dynamics of carbon partitioning between below- and above-ground tree components and to gain a better understanding of the soil and climatic factors that govern it. Fine root production peaked one year earlier than woody biomass production and years with high production of fine roots had low woody biomass production. All models that included May temperature in the calculation of the predicting/independent variables were significant predictors of total tree biomass production (r > 0.87). Fine root production was associated negatively with the previous year average growing season temperature (r < -0.84). Soil solution NO3 –, NH4 + and NO3 – + NH4 + concentrations were positively correlated with fine root production (r > 0.72) and negatively correlated with woody biomass production (r < -0.84). Leaf N and P concentrations were negatively correlated (r = -0.99 and r = -0.98, respectively) with fine root production for the period of 1994–1998. Our results suggest that a cool growing season, and in particular a cool month of October, is likely to result in low fine root production and nutrient uptake the following year and, therefore, to increase soil N availability and decrease leaf N. This initial response is thought to be the first step of a feedback loop involving plant N nutrition, soil N availability, fine root growth and aboveground biomass production that led to a cyclical (3–4 years) but asynchronous production of fine roots and aboveground biomass production.
