Effective fermentation monitoring is a growing need due to the rapid pace of change in the wine industry, which calls for fast methods providing real time information in order to assure the quality of the final product. The objective of this work is to investigate the potential of non-destructive techniques associated with chemometric data analysis, to monitor time-related changes that occur during red wine fermentation. Eight micro-fermentation trials conducted in the Valtellina region (Northern Italy) during the 2009 vintage, were monitored by a FT-NIR and a FT-IR spectrometer and by an electronic nose and tongue. The spectroscopic technique was used to investigate molecular changes, while electronic nose and electronic tongue evaluated the evolution of the aroma and taste profile during the must-wine fermentation. Must-wine samples were also analysed by traditional chemical methods in order to determine sugars (glucose and fructose) consumption and alcohol (ethanol and glycerol) production. Principal Component Analysis was applied to spectral, electronic nose and electronic tongue data, as an exploratory tool, to uncover molecular, aroma and taste modifications during the fermentation process. Furthermore, the chemical data and the PC1 scores from spectral, electronic nose and electronic tongue data were modelled as a function of time to identify critical points during fermentation. The results showed that NIR and MIR spectroscopies are useful to investigate molecular changes involved in wine fermentation while electronic nose and electronic tongue can be applied to detect the evolution of taste and aroma profile. Moreover, as demonstrated through the modeling of NIR, MIR, electronic nose and electronic tongue data, these non destructive methods are suitable for the monitoring of must-wine fermentation giving crucial information about the quality of the final product in agreement with chemical parameters. Although in this study the measurements were carried out in off-line mode, in future these non destructive techniques could be valid and simple tools, able to provide in-time information about the fermentation process and to assure the quality of wine.
