Introduction: There are different techniq-ues to reduce peripartum traumas and les-ionns including perineal tears and traumas. It has been stated that the active manag-ement of second labor stage, hands-on method or Ritgen’s maneuver, is associated with higher need for episiotomy and peri-neal traumas. Thus, hand-poised met-hod, which is done without touching the perin-eum in the second labor stage, is pref-erred. The objective of the present study was to evaluate the effect of the two metho-ds on perineal trauma and delivery outcome in primiparous women referred to Shariati Hospital, Isfahan.

Materials & Methods: This research was a clinical trial in which 100 low risk primi-parous parturients were randomly assigned into two groups; hands-on and hand-poised (hands-off). In the hands-on group, in the second stage of labor hands-on method was used to control fetal head, i.e., the fingers of one hand supports fetal occiput and the other hand applies slight pressure on the head to control the delivery of the head during the crowning process. In the hands-off group, the midwife observes 

the parturient and do not touch perineum during the second labor stage while fetal head is delivering. Then, the two groups were compared in terms of perineal trauma, as well as neonatal and delivery outcome.

Findings: The findings demonstrated that the two groups were significantly different in terms of perineal trauma resulted from episiotomy, and the need for episiotomy was smaller in the hands-off group (P < 0.0-01). Moreover, there are more first degree perineal tears in the hands-off group. Con-sidering hemorrhage and hematoma and also neonatal and delivery outcome, the two groups were not significantly different.

Discusion & Conclusion: It seems that hands-off method is associated with less perineal trauma, particularly lower need for episiotomy, and less perineal tear and is one safe methods. However, regarding delivery and neonatal outcomes, the two groups were not significantly different.

